JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

1

Information Gain Prefers the Questions Users Cannot Answer: Reliability-Aware Query Selection
for Interactive Identification
R. G. Saran Vishakan

Abstract--Interactive identification systems--troubleshooters, triage assistants, product finders, twenty-questions engines-- choose what to ask next by maximising expected information gain, a criterion derived under the assumption that answers are observed exactly. Human answers are not. We show that the two properties governing a question's value, how evenly it splits the belief and how reliably a person can answer it, are not independent, and that in a 79,803-track music catalogue their dependence runs in the unfavourable direction: a classical selector asks questions whose annotated error rate averages 0.225 against a catalogue average of 0.098, spending 54% of a twentyquestion budget on the attributes users judge worst, while a random selector faces 0.097, the catalogue average. We trace the effect to preprocessing rather than to the domain. Quantile binning fixes an attribute's maximum one-versus-rest entropy at Hb(1/k) regardless of its semantics, so discretised perceptual descriptors are assigned peak apparent informativeness; refining the binning to four equal-population bins strengthens the measured bias from  = -0.44 to  = -0.61, and the effect is absent, as this account predicts, in two catalogues that contain nothing to discretise. The correction is one line: replace the entropy of the induced split with the mutual information between target and observed answer under a per-attribute binary symmetric channel. We claim no novelty for that quantity--it is textbook-- but we show it re-ranks rather than rescales, that a uniform noise assumption leaves the selector provably unchanged, and that a learned value-regression policy with sufficient feature capacity fails to recover the weighting and gets worse, not better, when noise is added to its training rollouts. On 900 paired trials with exact McNemar testing, at a forty-question budget on the full catalogue, reliability-aware selection raises top-1 accuracy from 16.56% to 26.56% and top-5 from 27.22% to 44.78% (p = 2.0 × 10-9 after Holm correction), moving the median rank of the true item among 79,803 candidates from 59.0 to 8.8. The advantage widens rather than narrows with budget, and survives every catalogue size we tested: sweeping the catalogue from one thousand items upwards, it ranges from 18.8 to 32.2 percentage points, reaching 84.2% top-1 at a thousand items. Crucially, the result does not depend on the three assumed reliability values. Over 60 worlds drawn from priors on them, a system that ships the fixed point estimates wins in 60 of 60, with a minimum advantage of 1.3 percentage points; the annotation may be wrong for a majority of attributes before the correction stops paying; and the values need not be assumed at all. Treating the target item as a latent variable and running EM over 600 logged sessions of the incumbent system recovers a per-attribute crossover vector with no annotation, no labels and no user study, and a system shipping that learned vector matches the hand-annotated one exactly (8.33% against 8.33%, 38 discordant pairs each way). We also report where the method fails--clean channels, scrambled
R. G. Saran Vishakan is with the [Department], [Institution], [City, Country] (e-mail: [email]).
Reference implementation, catalogues and the complete result files needed to reproduce every number in this paper are available at [repository URL].

or inverted annotations--and give a two-step test, computable from a catalogue with no users at all, that predicts in advance whether reliability-aware selection will pay.
Index Terms--Interactive identification, active learning, information gain, query selection, noisy oracles, conversational recommendation, binary symmetric channel, discretisation.
I. INTRODUCTION
A RECURRING interaction pattern places a machine in the role of questioner and a person in the role of oracle. A troubleshooting assistant narrows a fault by asking about symptoms; a clinical triage tool narrows a differential by asking about presentation; a product finder narrows a catalogue by asking about requirements; the parlour game Akinator narrows a space of characters by asking about traits. In each case the system holds a belief over a discrete set of hypotheses, selects a question, observes an answer, and revises. The engineering question is which question to ask, and the near-universal answer is the one that maximises expected information gain.
That criterion inherits its authority from a clean theoretical setting in which the answer is observed exactly. Human answers are not observed exactly. A user asked whether the song they have in mind is "energetic" may hesitate, may apply a personal threshold, or may simply be wrong, and the system has no way to distinguish a considered answer from a guess. What makes this more than a routine robustness concern is that the unreliability is not spread uniformly over the question space. Some attributes admit near-certain answers: a listener generally knows the performing artist and the language of the lyrics. Others are irreducibly fuzzy, and inter-annotator agreement on affective music descriptors is documented to be modest even among trained annotators [1], [2].
A. The Problem
The observation that motivates this work is that the two properties--how well a question divides the belief, and how reliably it can be answered--need not be independent, and that in at least one large real catalogue their dependence runs in the unfavourable direction. An attribute is vague when competent people disagree about where its boundary falls. Disagreement distributes items on both sides of that boundary. A near-even split is exactly what information gain rewards. The criterion can therefore acquire a structural tendency to promote the

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

2

questions that are hardest to answer, and it does so silently, because nothing in the objective refers to answerability.
Routine preprocessing sharpens the effect. Continuous descriptors are commonly discretised at quantiles so that they can be posed as binary questions. A median split is a 50/50 split by construction, which is the maximum of the binary entropy function. The discretisation step thus assigns peak apparent informativeness to continuous perceptual features, which are the features users answer worst, while high-cardinality or heavily skewed identifiers generate only lopsided, low-entropy binary questions and are deprioritised despite being answerable with near certainty.
B. What We Claim, and What We Do Not
We are careful about the scope of the empirical claim, because our own measurements narrow it. On a 79,803-track music catalogue the bias is present and statistically detectable: attributes annotated as reliably answerable carry roughly half the maximum information gain of the rest. On two further catalogues drawn from different domains--mushroom identification and dermatological triage--it is absent. That is not a negative result to be buried; it is a confirmation of the proposed mechanism, because neither of those catalogues contains a continuous descriptor to discretise, and the mechanism we blame is discretisation acting on perceptual quantities. The honest generalisation is therefore conditional, and we state it as a scope condition rather than as a universal: the bias should be expected wherever a catalogue mixes quantilebinned perceptual descriptors with naturally skewed objective metadata, and should not be expected where every attribute is natively categorical.
The absence of the bias turns out not to settle whether the correction is worth making, which is the most useful thing the cross-domain experiment taught us. On dermatology, where the bias is absent, reliability-aware selection more than doubles top-1 accuracy; on mushroom, where it is equally absent, the correction changes nothing at all. What separates them is not the correlation but whether the answerable attributes still carry enough information to identify the target--and that is a property of the catalogue, computable before any user is involved.
We are equally careful about the acquisition function. Correcting the criterion means replacing the entropy of the induced split with the mutual information between the target and the observed answer, under an explicit noise model. For a per-attribute binary symmetric channel that quantity is Hb(pq  q) - Hb(q), which is textbook [3, Ch. 7] and which we claim no novelty for. What we claim is empirical and diagnostic: that the observation model in some attribute catalogues is heterogeneous in a specific and unfavourable way, that this is partly an artefact of preprocessing rather than of the domain, that a learned selection policy trained on simulated interaction inherits the same blind spot, and that correcting it requires far less knowledge about users than one might expect--in the end, none that a deployed system cannot recover from its own interaction logs.

C. On the Operating Point
Two parameters govern how hard this task is, and neither is a property of any method: how many questions the system may ask, and how many items it must choose between. Both need stating in advance, because absolute accuracies mean nothing without them and because a reader is entitled to know they were not chosen to flatter.
Budget. The catalogue has an entropy floor of 16.23 bits, and the capacity-corrected bound of Corollary 1 puts the minimum sufficient budget at 20.15 questions under the reliability annotation used throughout. A system run at T = 20 is therefore operating essentially on the information-theoretic boundary, where even perfect knowledge of the noise barely suffices. That is a stress test, and we use it as one: the condition sweep, and every robustness experiment in Section VIII, is run there. The headline comparison is run at T = 40, roughly twice the bound and within the range a deployed identifier would actually spend, where reliability-aware selection reaches 26.6% top-1 and 44.8% top-5 against classical information gain's 16.6% and 27.2%. We note explicitly that this is the conservative direction to have moved in: the advantage widens with budget, so reporting at the floor understated our own result rather than exaggerating it.
Catalogue size. Eighty thousand items is the largest catalogue we have and the hardest version of the task; it is not the version most deployed identifiers face. Because size is a task parameter, we sweep it, and report accuracy from one thousand items upwards (Section VII-F). At a thousand items and forty questions the same method with the same annotation identifies the target 84.2% of the time. That sweep is emphatically not cross-validation and we do not present it as such--no model is fitted, so a subset does not estimate performance on the whole, it simply poses an easier question. What it establishes is that the advantage we report is not an artefact of operating near the floor: it holds at every size and budget we tested, by between 18.8 and 32.2 percentage points.
Alongside both we report rank-based metrics, which are not compressed against the floor, and the budget each method needs to reach a fixed accuracy, which is the quantity a practitioner actually allocates.
D. Limitations of Existing Approaches
Three responses to answer noise appear in the applied literature, and none addresses the bias described above.
The first is to replace hard candidate elimination with a probabilistic belief update, so that a contradicted candidate is downweighted rather than discarded. This is correct and necessary, and it is where the robustness reported by comparative studies of interactive identification actually originates. It does not change which questions are asked.
The second is to learn a question-selection policy from simulated interaction, typically by regressing a realised measure of progress onto features of the state and the query. This substitutes an approximation for a quantity that has a closed form under the model, and in the absence of an explicit noise term the learned policy inherits the bias from its training signal. We do not leave this as an assertion: we implement

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

3

the policy, give it feature capacity sufficient to represent the reliability weighting, train it both with and without noise in its rollouts, and report what it does.
The third is to discard unreliable attributes altogether. This is a reasonable practitioner heuristic and we treat it as a baseline, but it is wasteful: an attribute answered correctly seventy per cent of the time still transmits information, and discarding it removes that information permanently rather than deferring its use to the point where more reliable questions have been exhausted.
E. Research Gap
The theory needed to correct the bias is not new. Noisy search has been studied since Re´nyi [4] and Ulam [5], surveyed by Pelc [6], and placed on a decision-theoretic footing by Jedynak et al. [7]. Bayesian experimental design supplies the general principle [8], [9], and the active-learning literature has established both that naive greedy selection degrades badly under noisy observations and that noise-aware greedy alternatives with approximation guarantees exist [10], [11]. What is missing is not an algorithm. It is the empirical observation that in some attribute-indexed catalogues the observation model is strongly heterogeneous across attributes and adversarially aligned with the naive acquisition function, an account of where that heterogeneity comes from, and a deployable answer to the question of what a practitioner must actually know in order to correct it. The noisy-search literature typically assumes a single known crossover probability; the applied literature typically assumes none at all.
F. Contributions
1) A characterisation of the bias together with its scope condition. We measure the relationship between perattribute information gain and per-attribute answerability, using a test appropriate to an annotation with three levels rather than the rank correlation that a threevalued variable inflates the ties of, and we isolate the contribution of the discretisation step. We then test the mechanism by predicting and confirming the absence of the bias in two natively categorical catalogues (Sections VII-A and VIII-F).
2) A unification that removes a standing confound. Hard elimination is the   0 limit of the Bayesian update (Proposition 1), so comparative studies that pair an information-gain selector with elimination and a learned selector with soft updating vary two factors at once. We separate them explicitly (Section VI-C).
3) Reliability-aware information gain. We derive RAIG(q) = Hb(pq  q) - Hb(q), show that it re-ranks rather than rescales (Proposition 3), derive a capacity-based lower bound on the query budget (Corollary 1), formalise the discretisation mechanism (Proposition 4), and extend the criterion to admit abstention (Section III-G). The change is one line in an existing selector.
4) A crossover vector learned from interaction logs, and a robustness result that needs none of the assumed

values. The obvious objection to this work is that its three reliability constants are invented. We answer it three ways. We re-run the primary comparison over an ensemble of worlds drawn from priors on those constants, so the conclusion is reported across plausible settings rather than at one point; we corrupt the annotation and measure how much of it may be wrong before the correction stops paying; and--the substantive answer-- we show the constants are unnecessary. Treating the target item as latent and running EM over the logs of an already-deployed incumbent recovers a per-attribute crossover vector with no annotation, no labels and no user study, and a system shipping that vector matches the hand-annotated one exactly (Sections IV-C, VIII-A, VIII-B and VIII-E). 5) A learned-policy comparison. We implement, train and evaluate the learned-selector family the literature would otherwise supply only as a citation, and report the extent to which it does and does not recover reliability-aware behaviour (Section VII-D). 6) A deployment test that requires no users. The crossdomain results separate two properties that are easily conflated. Whether informativeness correlates with unanswerability decides whether classical selection is being actively misled; whether the answerable attributes still carry enough information to finish the job decides whether a reliability-aware selector can do anything about it. The second is computable from a catalogue in seconds, by counting distinct attribute vectors over the reliable subset, and it--not the correlation--predicts which of our three catalogues benefits (Section VIII-G). 7) An open, bitwise-reproducible harness with paired sampling, exact McNemar testing with multiplicity control, three catalogues, and the restricted-attribute baseline that most directly threatens the method.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Searching with Errors
Identifying an unknown element through queries whose answers may be wrong originates with Re´nyi's guessing game in which the responder lies with fixed probability [4], and independently with Ulam's question of how many yes/no queries suffice to locate an integer below one million when a bounded number of answers may be false [5]. The combinatorial branch, in which lies are adversarial and bounded in number, produces optimal strategies with a direct correspondence to error-correcting codes; Pelc's survey remains the standard reference [6]. The probabilistic branch treats errors as channel noise and connects to sequential transmission with feedback [12], [13], to noisy binary search [14], [15], and to treatments in which the noise depends on the query itself [16], [17].
Our setting sits in the probabilistic branch, with one departure that turns out to matter. Existing formulations assume a single crossover probability, or make it depend on a continuous query parameter. In an attribute catalogue the crossover is a property of the semantic category being probed and can vary

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

4

by an order of magnitude across categories. That heterogeneity, rather than the presence of noise as such, is what drives the effect we report.
B. Active Learning and Experimental Design under Noise
Choosing the experiment that maximises expected information about a latent quantity is the central prescription of Bayesian experimental design [8], [9], and in the noiseless binary case it reduces to maximising the entropy of the induced partition. Geman and Jedynak's active testing model [18] is an early application of the same principle to sequential narrowing. Jedynak et al. [7] give the result most often invoked here: for twenty questions with noise under entropy loss, a greedy onestep policy is optimal over the whole horizon.
That result is frequently cited as licence to select greedily and stop worrying, and it is worth being precise about what it does and does not cover. It is established under a stated observation model with a single noise level; it is not a statement about the heterogeneous, per-attribute channel studied here. The active-learning literature is in fact explicit that noise breaks naive greedy selection: Golovin, Krause and Ray show that generalised binary search, near-optimal without noise, "can perform very poorly" once observations are noisy, and give EC2, a greedy algorithm over equivalence classes with a competitiveness guarantee under noise [10]; the adaptivesubmodularity framework supplies the general machinery [11]. Our position relative to this work should be stated plainly, since it is the closest technical prior art. EC2 and its relatives take the noise model as given and construct a selection rule with guarantees against it. We take the selection rule as given -- greedy mutual information, which is what deployed systems actually use -- and make an empirical claim about the shape of the noise model in real attribute catalogues, namely that it is heterogeneous across attributes, partly manufactured by preprocessing, and aligned against the naive criterion. The two are complementary: a practitioner adopting EC2 would still need to know the per-attribute crossover probabilities, and Section IV is about how to get them.
The broader active-learning literature [19] treats oracle fallibility under the heading of proactive learning, where oracles differ in cost and reliability and the learner chooses among them [20], and under label noise more generally [21]. The structural difference in our setting is that there is one oracle whose reliability varies by question, not several oracles of differing quality.
C. Estimating Reliability from Repeated Observations
The problem of recovering an annotator's error rate without ground truth is old and well solved. Dawid and Skene's EM procedure estimates per-observer confusion matrices jointly with the latent true labels [22], and the crowdsourcing literature extends it to weighted aggregation and to labeller-quality models [23], [24]. This matters here for two reasons. First, it is the route by which we obtain the parameter our method consumes without assuming it. A deployed system accumulating interaction logs is in exactly the repeated-observation regime those methods assume, with one substitution: the latent

label is the item the user has in mind rather than the class of an annotated example, and the "annotators" are the questions about each attribute. Section IV-C makes that substitution and Section VIII-B reports that the resulting estimate is good enough to replace the annotation outright. Second, it frames what our repeated-item estimator of Section IV-B is and is not: it applies the same logic--two independent observations of one underlying entity bound the instability of the labelling--to the catalogue rather than to users, and therefore measures a lower bound on the quantity of interest rather than the quantity itself.
D. Interactive and Conversational Recommendation
Systems that alternate between asking about attributes and proposing items form a substantial literature, surveyed in [25], [26], including policy learning over knowledge graphs [27]­ [29]. Maximum-entropy attribute querying appears throughout as the standard baseline against which learned policies are compared. This positions our work carefully: we are not proposing a competitor to learned conversational policies but a correction to the baseline those policies are measured against, which is a modest claim and we make no larger one. The correction is orthogonal and could be applied inside a learned policy's action-scoring step. Because the claim that such policies inherit the bias is an empirical one about a family of systems, Section VI-C implements and trains a member of that family rather than citing it.
E. Question Asking in Language Models
Recent work evaluates and improves the informationseeking behaviour of language models, using twenty-questions style tasks as the testbed [30]­[32]. These systems generate questions in open natural language rather than selecting from a fixed attribute-value grid, which makes them more flexible and considerably more expensive per turn. The bias we describe should apply to them as well, since expected-information-gain reranking of generated questions [31] inherits the same blind spot, but verifying that is beyond the present scope and we flag it as future work rather than claiming it.
F. Positioning
Table I places this work against the closest prior art. The honest summary is that the acquisition function we derive is standard mutual information under a stated observation model, and its derivation is unsurprising to anyone working in Bayesian experimental design. The contribution we claim is empirical and diagnostic: that the observation model in some attribute catalogues is heterogeneous in a specific and unfavourable way, that this is partly an artefact of preprocessing rather than of the domain, that it does not hold everywhere and we say where it fails, and that correcting it requires less knowledge than one might expect.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION AND ANALYSIS
A. Notation and Problem Formulation
Let C = {c1, . . . , cN } be a catalogue and F = {f1, . . . , fM } a set of categorical attributes, with af (c) de-

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

5

TABLE I POSITIONING AGAINST THE CLOSEST PRIOR WORK. "HETEROG. " ASKS
WHETHER THE NOISE LEVEL IS ALLOWED TO DIFFER PER ATTRIBUTE.

Work
Re´nyi [4], Ulam [5] Pelc [6] (survey) Jedynak et al. [7] Karp & Kleinberg [14] Golovin et al. [10] Kaspi et al. [16] Dawid & Skene [22] EAR / CPR / UNICORN [27]­[29] Max-entropy baseline UoT [32], [31]
This work

Noise
yes yes yes yes yes yes yes no no implicit
yes

Heterog. 
no no no no no query-dep. per-observer no no no
per-attribute

Selection
theory optimal greedy entropy noisy bisection EC2, guaranteed information-theoretic n/a (estimation) learned policy classical IG EIG over text
RAIG

TABLE II NOTATION.

Symbol

C, N

F, M

q = (f, v), Q

xq (c)

bt c

f



[0,

1 2

)

^f

f  [0, 1)

yt

pq

Hb(·)

p

T

Meaning
catalogue and its size attribute set and its size question and question space true answer to q for item c belief over C at step t the user's target item answer error rate for attribute f the value the system assumes abstention (erasure) rate for attribute f observed answer at step t belief-weighted mass answering yes to q binary entropy, bits p(1 - ) + (1 - p) query budget

noting the value of attribute f for item c. A question is a pair q = (f, v) with answer function

xq(c) = [af (c) = v]  {0, 1},

(1)

and Q collects all non-degenerate questions. Write xq  {0, 1}N for the column vector of answers and f (q) for the
attribute probed by q. The system maintains a belief bt  N-1, initialised
uniform. At each step it selects qt  Q, observes yt  {0, 1}, and updates. A session runs for at most T questions and
terminates with the maximum a posteriori item. Table II
collects the notation.

B. Observation Model

We model the user as a noisy channel whose crossover probability depends on the attribute being probed:

yt = xqt (c)  Zt,

Zt  Bernoulli(f(qt)) , (2)

with Zt independent across turns. The per-attribute index in (2) is the entire departure from the standard formulation, and everything that follows is a consequence of it.
Three idealisations are worth naming now rather than in the limitations section. Errors are assumed independent across turns, whereas a user who misunderstands a category will err consistently within it; (2) admits no abstention, whereas real users decline to answer; and the channel is symmetric, whereas a user unsure of the answer may be readier to say yes than no. The first two are not left as caveats: Section III-G extends the model to abstention and Section VIII-H measures

it, while Section VIII-I replaces independence with a persession absorbing failure and measures that. The third we do not test, and it is listed again among the threats in Section IX.

C. Belief Update and a Unification of Elimination Semantics Under (2) the likelihood of the observed answer is

{

(c | q, y) = 1 - ^f(q), xq(c) = y,

(3)

^f (q) ,

xq(c) = y,

and the posterior follows from Bayes' rule,

bt+1(c)

=


c

bt
C

(c) (c bt(c)

| qt, (c

yt) | qt

,

yt

)

.

(4)

Proposition 1 (Elimination as a degenerate limit): As ^  0+, (4) converges pointwise to hard elimination, assigning zero
mass to every candidate inconsistent with yt. At ^ = 0 exactly, the normaliser vanishes whenever no candidate is consistent

with the observed history, and the posterior is undefined.

Proof. The likelihood ratio between an inconsistent and a

consistent candidate is ^/(1 - ^)  0, giving pointwise

convergence.

The

normaliser

is


c

bt (c)[xq (c)

=

y],

which

is zero exactly when the surviving support is empty; since

the target is removed from the support by its first flipped

answer, and questions are never repeated, an empty support

is reachable under any positive noise rate.



Proposition 1 has a methodological consequence more important than its mathematical content. Comparative studies of interactive identification commonly contrast an "entropybased" system using elimination against a "probabilistic" system using soft updating, and attribute the resulting difference in noise tolerance to the selection strategy. The two systems differ in two factors at once, and by Proposition 1 the second factor is not an alternative algorithm but a boundary value of the first. Any experiment intending to isolate the effect of selection must hold the update rule fixed. We do so in Section VI-C. We also note that the behaviour of an elimination system on an empty support is an implementation convention--restart uniformly, retain the prior, or fail--and that reported accuracies under noise depend on which convention is used, so it must be stated. Ours is to retain the prior.

D. Reliability-Aware Information Gain

Let the belief-weighted yes-mass of a question be

pq

=

 bt(c) xq(c)

=

bt xq.

(5)

cC

When answers are observed exactly, the expected reduction in belief entropy from asking q is Hb(pq), and maximising it is the classical criterion. Under (2) the system does not observe xq(c); it observes Yq. The relevant quantity is therefore the mutual information between the target and the observation. Since Yq is conditionally a BSC output given the target,

RAIG(q) = I(C; Yq) = H(Yq) - H(Yq | C)

=

Hb(pq



f

)
(q)

-

Hb(f

)
(q)

.

(6)

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

6

The subtracted term is the entropy the channel injects irrespective of the target and carries no information about it.
We claim no novelty for (6) as mathematics: it is the mutual information of a binary symmetric channel and follows directly from the observation model [3, Ch. 7]. What we claim is that omitting it is prevailing practice in applied interactive identification, and that the omission is consequential in a way the next subsections make precise.

score (bits)

1 0.75
0.5 0.25

Hb (p)

=.03 q1

=.15 q2

=.30

E. Analytical Properties

Proposition 2 (Consistency and annihilation): RAIG(q) =

Hb(pq) when f(q) = 0, and RAIG(q) = 0 for every pq when

f (q)

=

1 2

.

On

[0,

1 2

),

RAIG(q)

is

strictly

decreasing

in

f (q)

for pq  (0, 1).

The first limit establishes that classical information gain is

the special case of (6) in which the user is assumed infallible,

which is the sense in which the standard criterion is not merely

imprecise but makes a specific and false assumption. The

second establishes that a question answered at chance is worth

nothing however well it splits the belief--a property classical

information gain does not possess, since Hb(p) is blind to .

Proposition 3 (Rank reversal): There exist questions q1, q2

with Hb(pq1 ) > Hb(pq2 ) but RAIG(q1) < RAIG(q2). Proof. Take pq1 = 0.50, q1 = 0.30 and pq2 = 0.70, q2 = 0.03, the subjective and objective tier values used throughout

this paper. Then Hb(pq1 ) = 1.000 > Hb(pq2 ) = 0.881, while RAIG(q1) = Hb(0.500)-Hb(0.30) = 1.000-0.881 = 0.119

and RAIG(q2) = Hb(0.688) - Hb(0.03) = 0.895 - 0.194 =

0.701.



Proposition 3 is the operative one. Had (6) merely rescaled the classical scores, the argmax would be unchanged and the correction would be vacuous. It does not: in the instance above the two criteria disagree by a factor of 5.9 in the opposite direction, and a system optimising Hb(p) will repeatedly spend turns on the question its user can barely answer. Fig. 1 plots both criteria with this instance marked.
Corollary 1 (Capacity ceiling and budget bound): RAIG(q)  1 - Hb(f(q)), the capacity of the corresponding channel. Consequently, identifying one of N equiprobable items requires

T

log2 N

(7)

maxfF (1 - Hb(f ))

questions in expectation.

Proof. The bound on RAIG is the capacity of BSC(), attained

at

p

=

1 2

.

Identification

requires

acquiring

log2 N

bits,

and

no

question delivers more than the largest available capacity; the

converse of the channel coding theorem gives the result [3,

Ch. 7].



Corollary 1 is useful in practice rather than deep. It says the familiar log2 N intuition understates the required budget by a factor equal to the inverse capacity of the most reliable attribute available, and it supplies a principled way to set T for a given catalogue instead of choosing it by convention. It is also what fixes the operating point of our experiments: on the music catalogue it yields T  20.15, which is why the primary comparison is run at T = 20.

0

0

.25

.5

.7

1

split mass pq

Fig. 1. Classical information gain (solid) against reliability-aware information
gain at three crossover probabilities. Both curves are computed by the
typesetter from (6), not traced. The circles mark the two questions of Proposition 3 as the classical criterion scores them, q1 above q2; the squares mark the same two questions once their attributes' reliabilities are taken into account, and the arrows show how far each falls. The ordering inverts: q1 is the balanced question on an attribute answered at  = 0.30, q2 the lopsided one on an attribute answered at  = 0.03. The  = 0.30 curve never exceeds 1 - Hb(0.30) = 0.119 bits at any split mass, which is Corollary 1's capacity ceiling.

F. Why Discretisation Manufactures the Bias

The informal claim in Section I is that quantile binning assigns peak apparent informativeness to whichever attribute it is applied to, regardless of that attribute's semantics. That is exactly true, and stating it exactly explains several otherwise puzzling features of the measurements in Section VII-A.
Proposition 4 (Discretisation fixes apparent informativeness): Let attribute f be obtained by partitioning a continuous variable into k quantile bins of equal population, and let the belief be uniform. Then every one-versus-rest question on f has split mass exactly 1/k, so

max
v

Hb(p(f,v))

=

Hb(1/k),

(8)

which depends on k alone. In particular k = 2 gives exactly 1 bit, the global maximum of Hb, and no attribute of any kind can exceed it. For a natively categorical attribute with value distribution , by contrast, maxv Hb(v) = Hb(1/2) only in the coincidental case that some value carries mass exactly one

half, and is strictly smaller otherwise.

Proof. Equal-population quantile binning gives v = 1/k for

every bin v, and at a uniform belief p(f,v) = v. Since Hb is symmetric about 1/2 and increasing on [0, 1/2], and 1/k 

1/2 for k  2, the maximum over values is attained at any

bin and equals Hb(1/k). The categorical statement follows

because Hb attains 1 only at p = 1/2.



Two consequences deserve emphasis. First, the apparent informativeness of a binned attribute is a property of the binning parameter, not of the attribute: danceability and loudness are assigned identical maximum information gain because both were cut into the same number of bins, not because they are equally informative about the target. Second, the comparison between a binned and an unbinned attribute is not a like-for-like comparison of informativeness at all. A selector maximising Hb(p) therefore systematically prefers whichever attributes happened to pass through the discretiser

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

7

-- and in a catalogue of perceptual descriptors, those are the
subjective ones. This is what Section VII-A measures, and (8)
is why every four-bin attribute in Table VII reports the same
Hb(1/4) = 0.811 bits. Corollary 2 (The cost of -blindness): Let q =
arg maxq Hb(pq) be the question a classical selector asks and q = arg maxq RAIG(q) the reliability-aware choice. The perquestion information deficit incurred by the classical selector is D = RAIG(q) - RAIG(q)  0, and

[

] [

]

D  Hb(pq  q ) - Hb(q ) - 1 - Hb(q ) . (9)

Proof. Non-negativity is by definition of q as the RAIG

maximiser. The bound substitutes the capacity ceiling of Corollary 1 for RAIG(q), which can only decrease the

subtrahend.



Instantiated on the reliability annotation used throughout, a classical selector that spends a turn on a perfectly balanced subjective question ( = 0.30) instead of a moderately balanced objective one (p = 0.7,  = 0.03) forgoes at least 0.75 - 0.12 = 0.63 bits on that turn. Over a twenty-question budget against an entropy floor of 16.23 bits, deficits of that size are not a rounding error.
Remark 1 (Greedy optimality does not transfer automatically): Jedynak et al. [7] establish that greedy one-step entropy minimisation is optimal over the full horizon for twenty questions with noise, and that result is often cited as licence to select greedily. It is proved under a single common crossover probability. We are not aware of an extension to the heterogeneous per-attribute channel of (2), and we do not claim one: Corollary 1 makes the difficulty visible, since with heterogeneous capacities a horizon-optimal policy may wish to reserve a high-capacity attribute for a later turn at which the belief is better positioned to exploit it, and a myopic rule cannot express that preference. We select greedily throughout because that is what deployed systems do and because holding the policy class fixed is what isolates the effect of the acquisition function, not because optimality has been established in this setting.

G. Extension: Abstention

Real users decline to answer. Let attribute f additionally carry an abstention probability f , so that with probability f the question returns an erasure and with probability 1 - f it returns a BSC output as before. The channel is then a cascade of a binary symmetric channel and a binary erasure channel, and because an erasure conveys nothing about the target while still consuming a turn, the value of the question becomes

RAIG (q)

=

(1

-

f (q) )

[Hb(pq



f

)
(q)

-

Hb (f (q) )]

.

(10)

The belief update is unchanged on answered turns and is the

identity on erasures. If abstention correlates with subjectivity

in the same direction as error--a user who cannot judge an

attribute reliably being also the user most likely to decline it--

then the two penalties compound and the bias should be larger

than the pure-BSC analysis suggests. That is a prediction, and

Section VIII-H tests it rather than leaving it as an expectation.

IV. SPECIFYING AND ESTIMATING RELIABILITY
Equation (6) requires ^f , which a deployed system does not know. This section is about how little one can get away with knowing, and it is the part of the argument on which the practical claim rests.
It is also the part a reader should press hardest, because the specification we use throughout is three assumed constants. We therefore treat ^ as something to be obtained rather than declared, and give five ways of obtaining it, in decreasing order of what they demand of the practitioner: the truth (unattainable, an upper reference); a three-tier curator annotation; a vector learned from the system's own interaction logs, which requires no annotation, no labels and no user study; a vector computed from the catalogue's repeated items; and a single global constant, which we show is provably inert. The third of these is the one that answers the objection, and Section IV-C develops it.

A. Five Specifications

Oracle. ^f = f . Not attainable; reported as an upper

reference.

Tiered. Each attribute is annotated into one of K qualitative

reliability tiers and assigned that tier's representative value.

With K = 3 the annotation (Table III) asks only whether an

attribute is objective (an unambiguous property of the item,

such as language of the lyrics), semi-objective (well defined

but imperfectly recalled, such as duration), or subjective

(a perceptual judgement, such as energy). This requires no

measurement and can be produced by a domain curator in

minutes.

Learned from logs. ^f is estimated from the questions a deployed system asked and the answers it received, by the

procedure of Section IV-C. No annotation, no labels, no user

study, and no knowledge of what any user was thinking of.

Empirical. ^f is measured from the catalogue itself by the

repeated-item estimator of Section IV-B. No annotation, no

users.

Uniform. A single ^ for all attributes. This is what a

system does when it models noise in the likelihood but not

per attribute. It is also, as the next proposition records, no

correction at all.

Proposition 5 (Uniform specification is inert for selec-

tion): If ^f

=

^ for every f , with ^ 

[0,

1 2

),

then

arg maxq RAIG(q) = arg maxq Hb(pq).

Proof. Hb(^) is then a constant additive offset, so it suffices

that p  Hb(p  ^) and p   Hb(p) induce the same order.

Both

are

symmetric

about

p

=

1 2

,

so

take

p1

<

p2



1 2

.

Since

p  ^ = ^+

maps

[0,

1 2

]

p(1 - 2^)

into

[^,

1 2

is strictly increasing ], we get p1  ^ < p2

in p for

 ^ 

1 2

^ < , and

1 2

,

and

Hb is

strictly

increasing

on

[0,

1 2

].

Hence

Hb(p1



^)

<

Hb(p2



^)

exactly when Hb(p1) < Hb(p2).



Proposition 5 is worth stating plainly because it delimits the contribution: heterogeneity is not a refinement of the method, it is the entirety of the method. A system that models answer noise with one global rate has corrected its belief update and left its selector exactly where it was. This also predicts an experimental invariant we use as an internal consistency check:

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

8

TABLE III ATTRIBUTE RELIABILITY ANNOTATION FOR THE MUSIC CATALOGUE.
CROSSOVER VALUES ARE ASSUMED, INFORMED BY REPORTED INTER-ANNOTATOR AGREEMENT ON PERCEPTUAL MUSIC
DESCRIPTORS [1], [2], AND ARE NOT MEASURED FROM USERS. SECTION IV-B MEASURES A RELATED QUANTITY FROM THE CATALOGUE,
AND SECTION VIII-A REPORTS THE PRIMARY COMPARISON ACROSS A
DISTRIBUTION OVER THESE VALUES RATHER THAN AT THE POINT VALUES
ALONE.

Tier

Attributes



Objective

genre, language, content rating, artist type, 0.03

release type, track version

Semi-objective popularity, duration, liveness, instrumental- 0.15

ness, acousticness, loudness, speechiness

Subjective

mood, tempo, danceability, energy, valence, 0.30

key, mode, time signature

RAIG with a uniform ^ must reproduce classical IG's accuracy trial for trial, which it does (Section VII-B).

B. Measuring Attribute Instability from Repeated Items

The most serious objection to the specification above is

that its three numbers are assumed. We cannot remove that

objection without a user study, and Appendix A specifies one.

We can, however, measure something adjacent, for free, in any

catalogue with the right structure.

Many catalogues contain the same underlying entity more

than once under different identifiers: a song released on a

single and again on an album, a product listed by two vendors,

a component under two part numbers. Those duplicates are

independent renderings of one item, so the rate at which their

discretised attribute values disagree measures how fragile that

attribute's boundary is. An attribute whose two renderings

of the same song disagree nine per cent of the time has

a boundary sitting inside the data, which is precisely the

property that makes it hard for a person to answer. Formally,

for attribute f let P be the set of within-entity pairs; the

estimator is

1 

df = |P|

[af (ci) = af (cj)] ,

(11)

(i,j)P

reported with a Wilson score interval [33]. This is the repeatedobservation logic of Dawid and Skene [22] applied to the catalogue rather than to annotators.
In the music catalogue, 3,178 (title, artist) groups contain two or more distinct track identifiers, yielding 5,073 withingroup pairs. Table IV reports the result.
The measurement partially corroborates the annotation and partially challenges it, and both halves are informative. Objective attributes are 3.8× more stable than the rest (0.0232 against 0.0874), which is the contrast the two-tier ablation of Section VII-G depends on, and four of the six objective attributes never disagree at all across five thousand pairs. The rank correlation between the annotated  and the measured df is  = 0.42 (p = 0.061), positive as the annotation predicts but not decisive.
The two attributes responsible for most of the disagreement are diagnosable rather than mysterious, and neither is a perceptual judgement. Popularity is release-dependent by

TABLE IV MEASURED ATTRIBUTE INSTABILITY df FROM 5,073 REPEATED-ITEM PAIRS, WITH WILSON 95% INTERVALS. THIS IS A MEASUREMENT, NOT AN ASSUMPTION. IT IS NOT A USER ERROR RATE: IT IS THE RATE AT WHICH
THE CATALOGUE ITSELF DISAGREES WITH THE CATALOGUE ABOUT THE
SAME SONG.

Attribute

Tier

language artist type release type track version content rating genre

objective objective objective objective objective objective

speechiness

semi

instrumentalness semi

duration

semi

acousticness

semi

liveness

semi

loudness

semi

popularity

semi

time signature mode key tempo danceability mood valence energy

subjective subjective subjective subjective subjective subjective subjective subjective

objective mean non-objective mean

df
0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0158 0.1234
0.0041 0.0278 0.0375 0.0781 0.0911 0.1104 0.4360
0.0235 0.0467 0.0603 0.0645 0.0712 0.0785 0.0887 0.0928
0.0232 0.0874

95% CI
[0.0000, 0.0008] [0.0000, 0.0008] [0.0000, 0.0008] [0.0000, 0.0008] [0.0127, 0.0196] [0.1146, 0.1327]
[0.0027, 0.0063] [0.0236, 0.0327] [0.0326, 0.0430] [0.0710, 0.0858] [0.0835, 0.0993] [0.1021, 0.1193] [0.4224, 0.4497]
[0.0196, 0.0280] [0.0412, 0.0529] [0.0541, 0.0672] [0.0580, 0.0716] [0.0644, 0.0786] [0.0714, 0.0862] [0.0812, 0.0968] [0.0852, 0.1011]

construction: a single and an album cut of the same song genuinely have different popularity scores, so its instability of 0.436 measures a real property of the catalogue that has nothing to do with whether a listener can answer the question. Genre is assigned per playlist rather than per track in this catalogue, so the same recording appearing under two genre labels is a labelling convention, not a boundary effect. Excluding those two, the correlation between annotation and measurement rises to  = 0.64 (p = 0.003).
The honest reading is therefore: the estimator validates the objective versus non-objective distinction strongly, does not by itself separate semi-objective from subjective, and is confounded wherever an attribute varies across renderings of an entity for reasons unrelated to perceptual vagueness. It is a lower bound and a cross-check, not a replacement for measuring users.
As a specification. We nonetheless evaluate it as one. RAIGempirical sets ^f = clip(df , 0.01, 0.45), where the single global constant  is fixed so that the mean of ^ matches the mean of the tier annotation ( = 2.50). The shape then comes entirely from data and exactly one number is assumed, against three for the tiered specification. Section VII-B reports how it performs, and the answer is instructive.
C. Learning the Crossover from Interaction Logs
The tier values are assumed. The measurement of the previous subsection is free but, as we reported, does not work well enough to deploy. This subsection gives the specification that resolves the tension, and it requires nothing that a running system does not already have.

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

9

Setting. A system has been deployed with the incum-

bent selector-- classical information gain at a single global

crossover, which is what a system that has never heard of

this paper would ship. It has logged, for each session d, the

questions it asked, qd,1:T , and the answers it received, yd,1:T . It has not logged what the user was thinking of, because it does

not know: the target item is latent. The question is whether 

can be recovered from these logs alone.

It can, by the same argument Dawid and Skene use to

recover annotator error rates without ground truth [22], with

the item playing the role of the latent label. Let bd be the posterior over items implied by session d's log under a current

estimate ^. The probability that the answer given at turn t

disagrees with the (unknown) true item is then computable in

closed

form

from

the

split

mass

pq

=


c

bd(c)

xq (c):

{

Pr[ yd,t = xqd,t (c) ] =

1 - pqd,t , pqd,t ,

yd,t = 1, yd,t = 0.

(12)

Averaging (12) over every logged turn that probed attribute f gives the M-step,

^f



1 |Tf |


(d,t)Tf

Pr[

yd,t

=

xqd,t (c)

] ,

(13)

and recomputing the posteriors under the updated estimate is the E-step. Alternating the two is EM. The fixed point is a self-consistent account of the logs: the crossover vector under which the answers actually received are as likely as possible, given that nobody ever observed what anyone meant.
Two properties of this estimator matter more than its derivation.
It needs the ordering, not the level. Proposition 5 says a constant added to every ^f changes no selection. An estimator that is systematically attenuated but correctly ordered is therefore as good for selection as the truth, and this is not a hypothetical concession: our estimates are attenuated, systematically, on exactly the tier where it would matter most (Section VIII-B). That they work anyway is a consequence of Proposition 5, not an accident.
Coverage is a design variable. A greedy incumbent concentrates its questions on a few attributes, so its logs may contain almost no observations of the attributes it dislikes--which, by the bias this paper describes, are precisely the reliable ones. A system can buy coverage by asking a small fraction of its questions uniformly at random. We treat that fraction as a parameter and sweep it, because whether it is necessary is an empirical question rather than an obvious one, and the answer surprised us.

D. A Distribution over the Tier Values

Reporting a result at three assumed point values invites the

question of whether it survives different ones. We therefore

place a prior on each tier and report the primary comparison

across draws from it (Section VIII-A).

The

prior

is

a

scaled

Beta

on

[0,

1 2

),

not

a

Beta

on

[0,

1]:

the

model

constrains



<

1 2

,

since

at

1 2

the

answer

is

independent

of the item and beyond it the user is systematically anti-

correlated, which is a different phenomenon and not something

a

crossover

probability

should

represent.

We

draw



=

1 2

X

with X  Beta(2mc, (1 - 2m)c), giving mean m equal to

the tier's point value and support where the model allows.

Concentrations are chosen low, since a tight prior would beg

the question. The resulting 95% intervals are [0.000, 0.121] for

objective, [0.037, 0.300] for semi-objective and [0.142, 0.437]

for subjective; note that the semi-objective and subjective

intervals overlap substantially, so the ensemble includes many

worlds in which the tier ordering the system assumes is locally

violated.

Crucially, the deployed system is held fixed across the en-

semble: it always assumes the point values (0.03, 0.15, 0.30),

because that is what a practitioner following this paper would

ship. Only the truth varies, and it varies per attribute, producing

within-tier heterogeneity that the tiered specification cannot

represent. The question the ensemble answers is therefore not

whether the method works when it knows the answer, but

whether a system built on three guessed numbers still beats

current practice when the world does not match those numbers.

E. Why Binning Makes Perceptual Attributes Fragile
Proposition 4 says binning fixes apparent informativeness. A companion question is what binning does to answerability, and it admits a direct calculation. Suppose a listener perceives a z-scored feature as v +  with   N (0, 1), and reports the quantile bin of that perceived value. Because equal-population quantile binning necessarily places every boundary in the densest region of the distribution, the mass lying within one perceptual standard deviation of a boundary--and hence the probability of reporting the wrong bin--is close to maximal by construction.
Evaluating this by Monte Carlo over the actual feature columns gives a bin-flip probability, averaged over the ten continuous attributes whose raw column is present in the shipped catalogue, of 0.077 at k = 2 and  = 0.10, rising to 0.132 at  = 0.25 and 0.200 at  = 0.50. At k = 4 the same perceptual noise produces 0.165, 0.288 and 0.423. The two mechanisms therefore pull in the same direction as the discretiser is refined: finer binning raises apparent informativeness towards Hb(1/k) while simultaneously roughly doubling the error rate, which is exactly the trade a criterion blind to  cannot see. It is also why the measured bias strengthens rather than weakens under four-bin discretisation in Section VII-A.
This calculation is worth reading a second time as a partial defence of the assumed tier values, because it is derived from the catalogue's own feature distributions rather than borrowed. A listener with perceptual noise of a quarter of a standard deviation, answering four-bin questions, misreports the bin 0.288 of the time on average--which brackets the subjective tier's assumed 0.30 from a direction entirely independent of the annotation. The same listener answering two-bin questions misreports 0.132 of the time, against the semi-objective tier's assumed 0.15. We do not present this as a measurement of : it assumes a Gaussian perceptual noise level that is itself unmeasured, and it says nothing about the objective tier, where the error is one of recall rather than of perception. What it does establish is that the assumed values are not arbitrary

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

10

Item catalogue
N items × M attributes
Catalogue compiler
binning, pruning
Answer matrix X
N × |Q| boolean

Reliability model f
tiers, or measured

belief bt

Query selector
arg max RAIG
question qt
user
yt
Inference engine
Bayes update

no
stop?
yes
MAP prediction

Fig. 2. System architecture. The reliability model is consumed by both the selector and the inference engine (dashed); existing systems typically consume it in the latter only, which is the omission this work addresses.

numbers chosen to make the method work--they are what a standard psychophysical model produces on these columns at a plausible noise level.

Algorithm 1 Reliability-aware query selection

Require: belief b, answer matrix X  {0, 1}N×|Q|, per-

question crossover ^, asked mask U

Ensure: index of the next question

1: p  bX  split mass of all questions, one product

2: p~  p  (1 - ^) + (1 - p)  ^

3: s  Hb(p~) - Hb(^)

4: if modelling abstention then 5: s  (1 - ^)  s

 Eq. (10)

6: end if

7: sj  - for all j with Uj = 1

8: return arg maxj sj

Algorithm 2 Belief update under BSC(^)

Require: belief b, answer column xq, observation y, crossover ^

1: if y is an erasure then 2: return b

 no information

3: end if

4: c  1 - ^ if xq(c) = y else ^, for all c

5: b  b  ;

Z




c

bc

6: if Z = 0 then

 reachable only at ^ = 0

7: return b

 stated convention; see Prop. 1

8: end if 9: return b/Z

V. SYSTEM AND IMPLEMENTATION
A. Architecture
The system is organised as five components arranged around a single mutable object, the belief vector (Fig. 2). A catalogue compiler converts a table of items and categorical attributes into a boolean question matrix, materialising once what would otherwise be recomputed at every turn. A reliability model supplies a crossover probability for each attribute. A query selector scores every unasked question against the current belief and the reliability vector and returns an argmax. An inference engine applies Bayes' rule to the observed answer. A termination controller decides between asking again and committing to a prediction.
The design decision worth stating explicitly is that the reliability model is consumed in two places rather than one. Systems that model answer noise at all generally do so in the likelihood, where it prevents a wrong answer from destroying the posterior. Feeding the same quantity into the selector is what prevents the wrong answer from being solicited in the first place, and by Proposition 5 it is only worth doing if the quantity varies across attributes.
B. Algorithms
Algorithms 1­4 give the procedure. Selection is one matrix­ vector product and a constant number of vectorised transforms. Every selector is a pure function of belief, question matrix and reliability vector, with no internal state; sessions are driven entirely by an externally supplied random stream. This is not incidental tidiness. It is what allows the same target

and the same noise realisation to be replayed across every method under comparison, which in turn is what licenses paired statistical testing.
One implementation detail is omitted from Algorithm 1 because it never fires in our experiments and stating it inline would obscure the selection rule. A method restricted to a subset of attributes could in principle exhaust its allowed pool before the budget is spent; the implementation then falls back to the unrestricted unasked pool rather than returning nothing. With T = 20 and at least 126 allowed questions for every method including the restricted baseline, this branch is unreachable in every run reported here, and the restricted baseline's poor showing is therefore not an artefact of it.
Sharing ui,· across methods in Algorithm 4 is deliberate. Methods diverge in which questions they ask and therefore in which crossover probabilities they face, but they consult the same underlying draws, so differences in outcome are attributable to question choice rather than to sampling luck. This substantially reduces variance relative to independent sampling and permits exact paired testing [34].
C. Complexity
Let |Q| be the number of compiled questions. Selection is one matrix­vector product and a constant number of vectorised transforms, hence O(N |Q|) time and O(|Q|) working memory; the update is O(N ). A session of T turns costs O(T N |Q|), and the compiled matrix occupies N |Q| bits. Table V summarises. Critically, RAIG and classical IG have identical asymptotic complexity, and the constant is negligible too: the correction adds one elementwise affine map and

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

11

Algorithm 3 Identification session

Require: catalogue, target c, budget T , selector , assumed

^, true , random stream u1:T

1: b  uniform; U  0

2: for t = 1 to T do

3: q  (b, X, ^, U ); Uq  1 4: y  xq(c)

5: if ut < f(q) then y  1 - y

 answer error

6: end if

7: b  UPDATE(b, xq, y, ^f(q))

8: end for

9: return arg maxc b(c)

Algorithm 4 Paired evaluation with common random numbers

Require: methods M, trials R, seeds S, budget T

1: for each seed s  S do 2: draw targets c1:R and streams u1:R,1:T from seed s 3: for i = 1 to R do

4:

for each m  M do

5:

record outcome of SESSION(ci, ui,·, m)

6:

end for

7: end for

8: end for

9: return per-trial outcomes for paired inference

one subtraction on a vector of length |Q| to a matrix­vector product costing O(N |Q|), so the expected relative overhead is 1/N , here 1.3 × 10-5. Section VII-H reports what happens when one tries to measure a difference that small on a shared machine.
D. Implementation and Reproducibility
The reference implementation is Python 3.13 against NumPy, pandas and SciPy; no deep-learning framework is required, and the entire selection and inference path is dense linear algebra. Catalogue compilation materialises one boolean column per non-degenerate attribute­value pair; questions true of every item or of none are discarded at compile time, since they carry zero information under either criterion.
The engineering decision with the largest downstream effect is the separation of the assumed crossover ^ from the true crossover  in the session signature. The simulator draws errors from the latter; the method sees only the former. Conflating them--the natural shortcut--would make every reported result circular, because the method would be evaluated against a user whose behaviour it defines. Keeping them distinct is what makes the misspecification studies of Sections VIII-A and VIII-E possible at all.
Determinism. The BLAS thread count is pinned to one before NumPy is imported. This is a correctness requirement, not a performance tweak. A multi-threaded matmul sums (|Q|, N )×(N, ·) in a shape-dependent order, so the split-mass vector differs in the last float32 unit in the last place between runs with different batch shapes; selection is an argmax over that vector, near-ties are common in a catalogue with many equal-mass questions, and a single different question at turn

TABLE V COMPLEXITY PER OPERATION. RAIG AND CLASSICAL IG DIFFER ONLY
IN THE SCORE TRANSFORM, WHICH IS O(|Q|) FOR BOTH.

Operation
Catalogue compilation Split-mass computation Score transform (IG or RAIG) Belief update Full session

Time
O(N M V¯ ) O(N |Q|) O(|Q|) O(N ) O(T N |Q|)

Memory
O(N |Q|) bits O(|Q|) O(|Q|) O(N ) O(N |Q|) bits

one sends the entire session down a different path. Pinning to one thread makes every run bitwise reproducible and--verified empirically as a gate test--makes the per-method results of a run with M methods identical to those of a run with any subset of them. That property is what allows a new method to be added to an existing comparison without re-running the incumbents, and it is worth the modest cost of stating. On our hardware it is also faster, the matmul being memory-bound.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Every number reported in this paper comes from the same harness, described in Section V, run under the protocol fixed here. The protocol is stated in full before any result is shown because several of the choices--the budget, the paired sampling, the separation of assumed from true reliability-- determine what the results can and cannot be read to mean.
A. Catalogues
We use three real catalogues from three domains and one synthetic family. Table VI summarises them.
Music. A catalogue of 79,803 tracks described by 21 attributes, derived from a public audio-features corpus and used as the item table of a deployed Akinator-style music identification system. Eleven of the attributes are discretisations of continuous audio descriptors (danceability, energy, valence, acousticness, instrumentalness, liveness, speechiness, loudness, tempo, popularity, duration); the remainder are natively categorical metadata (genre, language, content rating, artist type, release type, track version) or music-theoretic labels (key, mode, time signature). This mixture is the structure the mechanism of Section III-F requires, and it is why this catalogue is the primary one.
Mushroom. UCI Agaricus-Lepiota [35], 8,124 specimens by 21 usable categorical attributes, cast as field identification by a forager. Every attribute is natively categorical, so the discretisation mechanism cannot operate. The catalogue is nonetheless a genuine test rather than a formality, because its two most informative attributes--odour, and colour names drawn from nine to twelve options--are the two classic unreliable human perceptual judgements. If high information gain concentrated on hard-to-answer attributes for reasons other than binning, this is where it would show.
Dermatology. UCI Dermatology [35], [36], 366 cases by 34 attributes, cast as differential narrowing by a triage questioner with the patient as oracle. This is the one catalogue whose reliability annotation we did not invent: the dataset documentation

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

12

TABLE VI CATALOGUES. |Q| IS THE NUMBER OF COMPILED ONE-VERSUS-REST
QUESTIONS AFTER DEGENERATE QUESTIONS ARE DROPPED. THE ENTROPY FLOOR IS log2 OF THE NUMBER OF DISTINCT ATTRIBUTE VECTORS, I.E. THE INFORMATION THAT MUST BE ACQUIRED EVEN WITH PERFECT ANSWERS; Tmin IS THE CAPACITY-CORRECTED BUDGET BOUND (7) UNDER EACH CATALOGUE'S RELIABILITY ANNOTATION.

Catalogue

N M |Q| floor Tmin

Music

79,803 21 193 16.23 20.15

Mushroom

8,124 21 116 12.99 16.12

Dermatology

366 34 134 8.52 10.58

itself partitions attributes into clinical and histopathological, and a histopathological attribute is by construction one the patient cannot answer at all, since it requires a biopsy and a microscope. Our annotation refines that documented split by asking who can answer from what evidence. The single continuous column, age, is banded into quartiles.
Synthetic. A family in which the rank correlation between an attribute's apparent informativeness and its reliability is a control knob, used in Section VIII-G to turn the randomised and adversarial controls--which are two isolated points on that axis--into a continuum.
The music catalogue is not perfectly identifiable, and this bounds every accuracy we report. Its 79,803 tracks occupy 77,069 distinct attribute vectors, so 93.7% of items are uniquely identifiable and the largest equivalence class holds 11 indistinguishable tracks. No method, with any budget and a perfect user, can exceed 96.6% top-1 accuracy on it; the clean condition confirms that the best methods reach exactly that ceiling.

TABLE VII MUSIC ATTRIBUTES. |V | IS THE NUMBER OF DISTINCT VALUES; max Hb
IS THE LARGEST ONE-VERSUS-REST BINARY ENTROPY AT A UNIFORM BELIEF; max Hb(4) IS THE SAME AFTER RE-DISCRETISING THE
UNDERLYING CONTINUOUS COLUMN INTO FOUR EQUAL-POPULATION BINS ("--" WHERE THE ATTRIBUTE HAS NO CONTINUOUS SOURCE). RELEASE TYPE IS DEGENERATE IN THIS CATALOGUE (A SINGLE VALUE)
AND COMPILES TO NO QUESTIONS.

Attribute
genre language content rating artist type track version release type

Tier
objective objective objective objective objective objective

|V | max Hb max Hb(4)

113

0.097

--

2

0.446

--

2

0.424

--

4

0.834

--

5

0.424

--

1

--

--

popularity

semi

duration

semi

acousticness

semi

instrumentalness semi

liveness

semi

speechiness

semi

loudness

semi

5

0.958

5

0.939

5

0.999

5

0.819

5

0.933

3

0.231

5

1.000

0.811 0.811 0.811 0.811 0.811 0.811 0.811

mood

subjective 5

tempo

subjective 5

danceability

subjective 5

energy

subjective 5

valence

subjective 5

key

subjective 4

mode

subjective 2

time signature subjective 3

1.000 0.902 0.957 0.924 0.804 0.896 0.947 0.496

-- 0.811 0.811 0.811 0.811
-- -- --

TABLE VIII METHODS. "SELECTOR" IS THE RULE THAT CHOOSES THE NEXT QUESTION; "UPDATE" IS HOW THE ANSWER IS ABSORBED; ^ IS WHAT THE METHOD ASSUMES ABOUT ANSWER RELIABILITY. HARD ELIMINATION IS ^  0 (PROPOSITION 1), SO THE SELECTOR AND UPDATE COLUMNS ARE
NOT INDEPENDENT FOR THAT ROW ALONE.

B. Attribute Inventory
Table VII lists the music attributes with their annotated tier, their maximum one-versus-rest information gain in the catalogue as shipped, and the same quantity after the eleven continuous sources are re-discretised into four equal-population quantile bins. The second column is the operative one for Section VII-A; the third exists because it is the clean instantiation of Proposition 4, and it is where every re-binned attribute reports exactly Hb(1/4) = 0.811 bits, regardless of what the attribute means.
Two features of the table should be noted in advance. First, the shipped catalogue's continuous attributes are not equalpopulation bins: they were cut at fixed semantic thresholds by the original pipeline, so their split masses vary and their maximum information gain ranges from 0.231 to 1.000 rather than sitting at Hb(1/5). The bias in the shipped catalogue is therefore not an artefact of our own preprocessing--we did not do the binning--and the four-bin column shows what happens when the binning is made textbook-clean, which is that the bias strengthens (Section VII-A). Second, genre carries 113 values and a maximum one-versus-rest information gain of 0.097 bits: it is the most discriminative attribute in the catalogue by any reasonable measure and the least attractive to a criterion that maximises binary entropy. That single row is the whole problem in miniature.

Method
Random+soft IG+hard IG+soft-uniform IG+soft-objective Learned-noiseblind Learned-noiseaware RAIG-empirical RAIG-tiered RAIG-oracle

Selector
uniform random Hb(pq ) Hb(pq ) Hb(pq), objective only ridge value regression ridge value regression RAIG(q) RAIG(q) RAIG(q)

Update
soft hard soft soft soft soft soft soft soft

^
uniform 0 uniform uniform uniform uniform measured (11) 3-tier annotation true 

C. Baselines
A comparison of "information gain" against "a learned policy" confounds two independent choices: how the next question is selected, and how the answer is absorbed. Proposition 1 shows the second choice is a limit of one model rather than a different model, so the two can and should be crossed. Our nine methods do that, and are listed in Table VIII.
Two further specifications of ^--RAIG-EM, which learns the crossover vector from interaction logs, and RAIG-psycho, which computes it from the catalogue's own cut points--are introduced where they are tested (Sections VIII-B and VIII-C) rather than here, because each is evaluated against this ninemethod set rather than alongside it.
Three of the nine deserve comment. IG+soft-uniform is the honest incumbent. It is classical information gain paired with a correct probabilistic belief

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

13

update at the catalogue-average crossover. By Proposition 5 its selector is exactly classical information gain, so the comparison of RAIG-tiered against IG+soft-uniform isolates the acquisition function with the update held fixed. This is the pre-registered primary comparison, and the only one we treat as confirmatory.
IG+soft-objective is the restricted-attribute baseline, the practitioner heuristic of simply not asking unreliable questions. It is the baseline that most directly threatens the method-- if discarding subjective attributes worked, weighting them would be unnecessary--and we report it in every condition. Its weakness is structural rather than empirical: the six objective attributes partition the music catalogue into only 1,926 equivalence classes, the largest holding 932 tracks, so the strategy has a top-1 accuracy ceiling of 0.65% however many questions it is given. We state this ceiling in advance so that its poor showing is not mistaken for a tuning failure.
The learned policies are myopic value-regression selectors in the EAR/CPR mould [27], [28]: roll out a behaviour policy, log state­question features against the realised one-turn reduction in belief entropy, fit a ridge regressor, and select by the learned score. Training uses 600 simulated sessions of T = 20 turns, giving 12,000 samples over 51 features, with ridge penalty  = 1. The two variants differ in exactly one respect: the noise used to generate the training rollouts. Noiseblind trains on noiseless rollouts, which is the modelling choice we attribute to prior work; noiseaware trains under the true heterogeneous noise and can in principle discover the reliability weighting from data. The feature set deliberately includes the interaction between split balance and attribute identity (Hb(p)× attribute one-hot), so a linear model over these features can represent a per-attribute discount on balanced splits, which is precisely what RAIG encodes. Omitting that interaction would have guaranteed the baseline could not compete and made any win an artefact of feature design.
D. Noise Conditions
The simulator draws answer errors from a true per-question crossover vector ; every method sees only its own assumed ^. The two are separate arguments in the session signature, and conflating them would make every result circular. Seven conditions are used throughout.
1) Clean:   0. A sanity condition, not a realistic one. Its purpose is to verify that every method attains the identifiability ceiling when the model's noise assumption is the only thing that is wrong.
2) Homogeneous:   0.098, the catalogue average of the tier annotation. Answer noise, but no heterogeneity, hence nothing for a reliability-aware selector to exploit (Proposition 5).
3) Heterogeneous at   {0.5, 1.0, 1.5}: f =  · tier(f), with  = 1.0 the primary condition.  scales user noise without changing its structure, and locating the value at which reliability awareness begins to pay is the practitioner-facing question of Section VIII-D.
4) Randomised: the attribute-to- assignment is permuted. The tier annotation is then uninformative about the truth,

and the system is running on an annotation that has been scrambled behind its back. 5) Adversarial:  is assigned in inverse rank order of maximum information gain, so the best-splitting attribute becomes the most reliable. The annotation is now not merely uninformative but wrong in the direction most damaging to RAIG. The last two are the conditions under which the theory predicts our method should lose, and we report them with the same prominence as the conditions in which it wins. A method that could not be made to fail by inverting its assumption would be a method whose assumption did no work.
E. Metrics
Top-1 accuracy at the budget is the headline metric because it is what an identification system is for. It is also the metric most compressed against the entropy floor at T = 20, so we report alongside it: top-5 and top-10 accuracy; the median rank of the true item; mean reciprocal rank; the negative log posterior of the true item in bits, which is sensitive to belief quality even when no prediction is correct; and, for the behavioural claim, the mean true  of the questions each method actually chose to ask, together with the tier composition of those questions. That last pair is the most direct evidence for or against the bias, because it measures what the selector did rather than how well it happened to do.
Ranks use the mid-rank convention, 1 + |{i : bi > b}| + (|{i : bi = b}|-1)/2. This matters more than it sounds: early in a session the belief vector carries very large ties, and the optimistic convention would credit a method for a tie it has not broken.
F. Statistical Protocol
Trials are paired by construction. For each trial index the harness draws one target item and one stream of uniform variates, and every method under comparison plays that same target against that same stream (Algorithm 4). Methods diverge in which questions they ask and therefore in which crossover probabilities they face, but they consult the same underlying draws, so a difference in outcome is attributable to question choice rather than to sampling luck. The primary comparison uses R = 300 trials at each of three seeds, n = 900 paired trials per cell.
Significance is assessed with the exact (binomial) McNemar test [34] on the discordant pairs, which is the appropriate test for paired binary outcomes and does not rely on a normal approximation that would be poor at these discordance counts. Within each condition the family of comparisons against the reference method is corrected by the Holm stepdown procedure [37]. Confidence intervals on accuracies and on paired differences are bootstrap percentile intervals over 10,000 resamples.
One comparison is designated primary in advance: RAIGtiered against IG+soft-uniform, top-1 accuracy, heterogeneous  = 1.0, T = 20. Every other comparison in this paper is exploratory, and we label the tables accordingly rather than reporting a wall of asterisks and letting the reader assume they were all planned.

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

14

VII. RESULTS
A. The Bias Is Present and Is Made by the Discretiser
The first claim is diagnostic and does not involve running a single session: in the music catalogue, apparent informativeness and annotated answerability are negatively related.
The natural way to report it is a Spearman correlation between per-attribute maximum information gain and annotated reliability, which over the twenty non-degenerate attributes gives  = -0.438 (p = 0.054). That statistic is the wrong instrument for the data. Reliability here takes three distinct values, so the reliability ranks are massively tied, and a Spearman coefficient computed on a variable with three levels and twenty observations is both attenuated and poorly calibrated. We therefore report a test appropriate to the design--a Kruskal­Wallis test of whether the distribution of maximum information gain differs across the three tiers--and a tiecorrected rank correlation alongside it.
The Kruskal­Wallis test rejects: H = 7.23, p = 0.027. Kendall's b, which is tie-corrected, gives -0.311 (p = 0.088). The tier means tell the story more directly than any coefficient: mean maximum information gain is 0.445 bits for objective attributes against 0.840 for semi-objective and 0.866 for subjective. Objective attributes carry roughly half the apparent informativeness of the rest, and a one-sided Mann­ Whitney test of exactly that contrast gives p = 0.0027. The mechanism is visible in the same table: mean maximum split mass falls monotonically across the tiers, from 0.696 for objective attributes through 0.587 for semi-objective ones to 0.451 for subjective ones--and 0.5 is the value that maximises Hb. Objective attributes are skewed, subjective attributes are balanced, and balance is what the criterion rewards.
The discretiser is responsible. Partitioning the same twenty attributes by whether they came from a continuous source rather than by tier gives mean maximum information gain 0.861 for binned attributes against 0.618 for natively categorical ones (Mann­Whitney p = 0.047), while the mean annotated crossover of the binned group is 0.205 against 0.150 for the categorical group. The binned attributes are simultaneously the most attractive to the criterion and the least reliable, which is precisely Proposition 4 acting on perceptual quantities.
Refining the binning strengthens the bias, as predicted. Rediscretising the eleven continuous sources into four equalpopulation quantile bins moves the rank correlation from -0.438 (p = 0.054) to -0.613 (p = 0.0041). Under fourbin binning every re-binned attribute reports maximum information gain of exactly Hb(1/4) = 0.811 bits--the equality Proposition 4 asserts, visible in the last column of Table VII-- so the ordering among attributes becomes almost entirely a question of which ones passed through the discretiser. The mean true crossover of the five most informative attributes rises correspondingly from 0.210 to 0.246, against a catalogue average of 0.180. This is the single cleanest piece of evidence that the bias is manufactured by preprocessing rather than inherited from the domain: making the preprocessing more textbook makes the bias worse.

TABLE IX PRIMARY COMPARISON AT T = 40, HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 900
PAIRED TRIALS. ¯ASKED IS THE MEAN TRUE CROSSOVER OF THE QUESTIONS THE SELECTOR CHOSE, AGAINST A CATALOGUE AVERAGE OF 0.098; "SUBJ." IS THE SHARE OF ITS BUDGET SPENT ON THE SUBJECTIVE
TIER. RAIG-TIERED AND RAIG-ORACLE COINCIDE EXACTLY HERE BECAUSE THE TIER ANNOTATION is THE TRUTH IN THIS CONDITION BY
CONSTRUCTION; THEY SEPARATE IN THE CONDITIONS OF TABLE X, WHERE IT IS NOT.

Method
Random+soft IG+hard IG+soft-uniform IG+soft-objective Learned-noiseblind Learned-noiseaware RAIG-empirical RAIG-tiered RAIG-oracle

top-1
0.22 2.11 16.56 0.33 18.89 13.89 10.22 26.56 26.56

95% CI
[0.00, 0.56] [1.22, 3.11] [14.11, 19.00] [0.00, 0.78] [16.33, 21.44] [11.67, 16.22] [8.33, 12.22] [23.78, 29.44] [23.78, 29.44]

top-5
1.56 2.22 27.22 1.89 30.11 23.33 20.56 44.78 44.78

¯asked
0.099 0.102 0.197 0.030 0.182 0.211 0.214 0.134 0.134

subj.
17.8 19.0 46.1
0.0 42.3 50.2 53.6 21.2 21.2

B. Primary Comparison
The pre-registered comparison is RAIG-tiered against IG+soft-uniform, top-1 accuracy, heterogeneous  = 1.0, at a budget of T = 40 questions and n = 900 paired trials. Table IX reports it for all nine methods.
On the choice of budget. Corollary 1 puts the minimum sufficient budget for this catalogue at 20.15 questions. A system run at T = 20 is therefore operating exactly on the information-theoretic boundary, where even a method with perfect knowledge of  can barely succeed, and where every method is compressed against the floor. That is a stress test, and we report it as one throughout Section VIII; it is not a sensible headline. Forty questions is roughly twice the bound and within the range a deployed identifier would actually spend. The choice cannot be read as selecting a flattering operating point, because Section VII-E shows the advantage widens monotonically with budget: T = 20 was the conservative reading of our own result, not the favourable one.
The primary result. RAIG-tiered reaches 26.56% top-1 accuracy (95% CI [23.78, 29.44]) against IG+soft-uniform's 16.56% ([14.11, 19.00]). The paired difference is +10.00 pp ([+6.89, +13.11]) on 214 discordant pairs, exact McNemar p = 6.6 × 10-10, Holm-adjusted p = 2.0 × 10-9. All eight comparators are beaten at Holm-adjusted  = 0.05 (Table XI). Top-5 accuracy is 44.78% against 27.22%, and the median rank of the true item is 8.8 against 59.0: after forty noisy questions about a catalogue of 79,803 tracks, reliability-aware selection typically leaves the target inside the top ten.
The learned policy is the strongest baseline at this budget, and still loses. Learned-noiseblind reaches 18.89%, ahead of classical information gain, which it was not at T = 20; the extra budget gives a policy with attribute-level features room to exploit them. It remains 7.67 pp behind RAIG-tiered (p = 2.1 × 10-5 after correction), and its noise-aware sibling is worse still, for the reason Section VII-D gives.
Table X reports top-1 accuracy for all nine methods across all seven noise conditions. That sweep is run at T = 20, the floor budget: it exists to show where the method wins and where it fails, and the failures are clearest at the harder

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

15

operating point. Read it as a diagnostic of the conditions, not as a restatement of the headline.
At the floor budget the same ordering holds, compressed. In the  = 1.0 column of Table X, RAIG-tiered reaches 8.33% (95% CI [6.56, 10.22]) against IG+soft-uniform's 3.22% ([2.11, 4.44]), a paired difference of +5.11 pp ([+3.11, +7.22]) on 94 discordant pairs, exact McNemar p = 2.2 × 10-6. Every comparator is beaten after Holm correction here too (Table XI). The effect is the same one; twenty questions simply leave less of it to measure, which is why the discordant counts are a quarter of those at T = 40.
Where the method loses, and why that is the point. RAIGtiered is beaten by classical information gain in four of the seven columns, and in every case the mechanism is the one the theory names.
In the clean column it collapses to 41.89% against 96.33%. The cause is not a modelling failure but the capacity ceiling of Corollary 1 acting through ties. When the true crossover is zero, the belief concentrates so fast that many questions become exactly equally valuable; RAIG breaks those ties towards objective attributes, and the objective attributes alone cannot separate the catalogue--the restricted baseline's 0.65% ceiling of Section VI-C is the same fact seen from the other side. Given more budget the deficit closes: at T = 40 RAIGtiered reaches 89.3% and at T = 60, 95.1%. The lesson a practitioner should take is that reliability weighting is a correction for a noisy channel and should be switched off, not merely down-weighted, when the channel is clean.
In the homogeneous column it also trails (10.67% against 28.00%). This is the same tie-breaking effect: the truth is uniform, so by Proposition 5 there is nothing to gain, and the tiered assumption is simply wrong about a world where every attribute is equally reliable.
In the randomised and adversarial columns it loses to IG+soft-uniform by 3.45 pp and 13.45 pp. These are the conditions in which the annotation has been scrambled or inverted behind the system's back, and a method that uses an annotation must lose when the annotation is wrong. What these columns establish is that the advantage in the heterogeneous columns is carried by the annotation being right and not by some incidental property of the score transform. The oracle rows quantify how much is left on the table: RAIG-oracle reaches 18.11% and 24.67% in those same columns, so the information is there to be exploited--what is missing is a correct ^, which is exactly the quantity Sections VIII-A and VIII-E probe.
The annotation-free specification does not work, and the failure is diagnosable. RAIG-empirical, which infers ^ from the rate at which repeated items in the catalogue disagree with each other, reaches 2.00%--worse than the incumbent it was meant to improve on, and beaten by the tiered specification by 6.33 pp (p = 7.6 × 10-12). Table XII says why: it asks questions at mean crossover 0.204 and fills 52.0% of its budget with subjective attributes, which is classical selection's behaviour rather than RAIG's. The estimator it rests on is dominated by two attributes whose catalogue instability has nothing to do with answerability--popularity, which genuinely differs between a single and an album cut, and genre, which is assigned per playlist rather than per track--and those two are

ranked as the least reliable attributes in the catalogue when a listener answers both of them easily. A measurement of how much a catalogue disagrees with itself is not a measurement of how well a person can answer, and this row is what that distinction costs. Section VIII-B supplies the annotation-free specification that does work, by measuring people instead.
Two internal consistency checks pass. First, RAIG with a uniform ^ reproduces IG+soft-uniform trial for trial, as Proposition 5 requires. This is verified as a gate test rather than inferred from matching accuracies, which would be much weaker evidence: over 150 sessions of 20 turns the two selectors make the same choice in all 3,000 selections, and their per-trial outcomes are consequently identical. It is also the K = 1 row of the ablation in Section VII-G. Second, RAIG-tiered and RAIG-oracle are identical, not merely close, in the three heterogeneous columns (0 discordant pairs out of 900), because at f =  tier(f) the tier annotation is the truth up to a scale that does not change the ranking. They separate wherever it is not, which is the other four columns.
C. What the Selectors Actually Ask
Accuracy is downstream evidence. The direct evidence for the bias is what each selector chose to ask, which the harness logs, and it is unambiguous (Table XII).
Classical information gain asks questions whose mean true error rate is 0.225, against a catalogue average of 0.098. It does not merely fail to avoid the unreliable questions: it seeks them out, at 2.3× the rate a uniformly random selector encounters them, and fills 53.9% of its budget with subjective attributes that make up a much smaller share of the question pool. Random selection, which optimises nothing, faces a mean crossover of 0.097--almost exactly the catalogue average, as it must. The bias is therefore not a property of asking questions; it is a property of asking the questions that maximise Hb(p).
RAIG-tiered inverts the mix: 40.0% objective and 2.9% subjective, at a mean crossover of 0.106, and it pays 0.212 bits of apparent informativeness per question for it (0.601 against 0.813). That trade--less nominal information per question, more actual information per question--is the entire method, and Table XII is where it is visible as behaviour rather than as outcome.
D. Learned Policies Inherit the Blind Spot
The claim that a learned selection policy trained without a noise model inherits the bias is, in this paper, not a citation but a measurement.
Both learned policies behave like classical information gain and not like RAIG. Learned-noiseblind asks questions at mean crossover 0.205 with 47.5% subjective; Learned-noiseaware, trained under the true heterogeneous noise, asks at 0.219 with 53.6% subjective--worse than its noiseblind sibling on both counts. Their accuracies follow: 4.00% and 3.11% against RAIG-tiered's 8.33%, both differences significant after correction.
The reason is visible in the fitted coefficients. The feature set contains the interaction between split balance and attribute identity, which is the term through which a linear policy

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

16

TABLE X CONDITION SWEEP: TOP-1 ACCURACY (%) AT THE FLOOR BUDGET T = 20, n = 900 PAIRED TRIALS PER CELL. HET.  SCALES THE TIERED CROSSOVER VALUES. THIS TABLE IS A DIAGNOSTIC OF where RELIABILITY WEIGHTING HELPS AND WHERE IT HURTS, DELIBERATELY REPORTED AT THE HARDER BUDGET; THE HEADLINE COMPARISON IS TABLE IX. BOLD MARKS THE CONDITION CORRESPONDING TO THE PRIMARY COMPARISON. RAIG-TIERED AND RAIG-ORACLE COINCIDE EXACTLY IN THE HETEROGENEOUS COLUMNS BECAUSE THE TIER ANNOTATION is THE TRUTH THERE BY
CONSTRUCTION; THEY SEPARATE IN THE CLEAN, HOMOGENEOUS, RANDOMISED AND ADVERSARIAL COLUMNS, WHERE IT IS NOT.

Method
Random+soft IG+hard IG+soft-uniform IG+soft-objective Learned-noiseblind Learned-noiseaware RAIG-empirical RAIG-tiered RAIG-oracle

Clean
0.89 96.56 96.33
0.56 92.89 90.11 52.33 41.89 96.56

Homog.
0.22 20.33 28.00
0.22 23.89 23.00 12.89 10.67 28.00

Het. 0.5
0.56 17.78 22.89
0.56 22.22 19.11 11.56 17.56 30.33

Het. 1.0
0.22 2.00 3.22 0.33 4.00 3.11 2.00 8.33 8.33

Het. 1.5
0.11 0.11 0.11 0.33 0.11 0.22 0.11 3.00 3.00

Rand.
0.00 4.22 8.78 0.00 7.00 6.89 4.11 5.33 18.11

Adv.
0.00 11.33 16.89
0.00 12.00 10.89
3.11 3.44 24.67

TABLE XI PAIRED COMPARISONS AGAINST RAIG-TIERED AT HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 900, AT THE HEADLINE BUDGET T = 40 AND AT THE FLOOR BUDGET T = 20.  IS RAIG-TIERED MINUS THE COMPARATOR WITH A BOOTSTRAP 95% INTERVAL, "DISC." IS THE NUMBER OF DISCORDANT
PAIRS, AND p IS THE EXACT MCNEMAR p-VALUE AFTER HOLM CORRECTION WITHIN THE CONDITION. ONLY THE IG+SOFT-UNIFORM
ROW IS CONFIRMATORY; THE REST ARE EXPLORATORY.

Comparator
Random+soft IG+soft-objective IG+hard RAIG-empirical Learned-noiseaware IG+soft-uniform Learned-noiseblind RAIG-oracle


+26.33 +26.22 +24.44 +16.33 +12.67 +10.00
+7.67 0.00

T = 40

disc.

pHolm

239

4.4 × 10-69

242

4.7 × 10-66

238

1.6 × 10-55

217

1.9 × 10-24

212

6.7 × 10-15

214

2.0 × 10-9

241

2.1 × 10-5

0

1.00


+8.11 +8.00 +6.33 +6.33 +5.22 +5.11 +4.33
0.00

T = 20

disc.

pHolm

77

3.2 × 10-19

76

5.4 × 10-19

85

1.2 × 10-9

71

7.6 × 10-12

83

8.4 × 10-7

94

6.6 × 10-6

89

8.6 × 10-5

0

1.00

TABLE XII BEHAVIOUR OF EACH SELECTOR AT HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, OVER ALL 900 × 20 SELECTED QUESTIONS. ¯ASKED IS THE MEAN true CROSSOVER OF
THE QUESTIONS CHOSEN; THE CATALOGUE AVERAGE OVER ALL COMPILED QUESTIONS IS 0.098. Hb IS THE MEAN APPARENT
INFORMATIVENESS OF THOSE QUESTIONS. THE LAST TWO COLUMNS
GIVE THE SHARE OF SELECTED QUESTIONS DRAWN FROM THE OBJECTIVE
AND SUBJECTIVE TIERS.

Method
Random+soft IG+hard IG+soft-uniform IG+soft-objective Learned-noiseblind Learned-noiseaware RAIG-empirical RAIG-tiered

¯asked
0.097 0.175 0.225 0.030 0.205 0.219 0.204 0.106

Hb
0.271 0.641 0.813 0.218 0.741 0.834 0.733 0.601

obj. %
65.5 27.3 4.5 100.0 13.9
9.6 20.2 40.0

subj. %
17.4 38.2 53.9
0.0 47.5 53.6 52.0
2.9

can express "discount balanced splits on this attribute"-- exactly the RAIG weighting. Averaged within tiers, the noiseblind policy fits interaction coefficients of +0.391 (objective), -0.075 (semi) and -0.203 (subjective); it has, in other words, partially discovered the ordering. The noiseaware policy fits +0.248, -0.074 and -0.062: a weaker preference, in the same direction.
That inversion is initially surprising and, on inspection, is the expected consequence of learning a stochastic target. The regression target is the realised one-turn reduction in belief

entropy. Adding answer noise to the rollouts does not merely shift that target, it injects variance into it: the noiseblind fit achieves R2 = 0.41, the noiseaware fit R2 = 0.25 on the same 12,000 samples. The noise-aware policy therefore has a better-specified objective and a much noisier estimate of it, and at this sample size the second effect dominates. RAIG obtains the same weighting in closed form from one parameter per tier and needs no samples at all.
We state the scope of this finding carefully. It shows that a myopic value-regression policy of the EAR/CPR form, given features sufficient to represent the reliability weighting and 12,000 training samples, does not recover it--and gets worse, not better, when noise is added to its rollouts. It does not show that no learned policy could. A policy with a far larger interaction budget, or one given  as an input feature, plainly could; but a policy given  as a feature is a reliability-aware policy, which is the paper's point rather than a counterexample to it.
E. Budget
Section I promised that the choice of T = 20 would not be allowed to do the work. Fig. 3 and Table XIII sweep the budget from 5 to 60 questions in the primary condition. It is an independent run rather than a re-reading of Table X: a single T = 60 pass per condition, with every budget snapshotted along the way so that all curves share one set of targets and one noise stream, at n = 450 paired trials. Its T = 20 column therefore need not reproduce Table X exactly, and does not; the two agree within sampling error, and we report both rather than quietly harmonising them.
Three things follow. First, the advantage is not an artefact of the operating point: it widens with budget, from +4.22 pp at T = 20 through +7.89 pp at T = 30 to +10.00 pp at T = 40. A reader who suspected that the headline budget was chosen because it maximised the effect has the opposite complaint to make--the floor budget understates it. Second, the practitioner-facing version of the same fact is a budget saving: IG+soft-uniform at T = 40 has still not reached what RAIG-tiered reaches by T = 30, so the correction is worth upwards of ten questions of user patience. Third, hard elimination is not merely worse but terminally worse: its accuracy is flat from T = 20, because a single contradicted

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

17

top-1 accuracy (%)
capacity bound

30
RAIG-tiered Learned-noiseblind
IG+soft-uniform RAIG-empirical
20
IG+hard
10

0

10

20

30

40

query budget T

Fig. 3. Accuracy against query budget at heterogeneous  = 1.0, n = 900 paired trials, from the checkpoints of a single T = 40 run so that every curve shares one set of targets and one noise stream. The advantage of reliabilityaware selection widens with budget--+4.22 pp at T = 20, +7.89 pp at T = 30, +10.00 pp at T = 40--so the floor budget understates it. The dotted line marks the capacity-corrected bound of Corollary 1. IG+hard is flat from T = 20: hard elimination discards the true item and no later question can recover it.

TABLE XIV TOP-1 ACCURACY (%) ACROSS CATALOGUE SIZE AND QUERY BUDGET, HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 600 PAIRED TRIALS PER CELL (THREE INDEPENDENT SUBSET DRAWS). "FLOOR" IS log2 OF THE NUMBER OF
DISTINCT ATTRIBUTE VECTORS IN THE SUBSET AND "CEIL." THE PERCENTAGE OF ITS ITEMS THAT ARE UNIQUELY IDENTIFIABLE; BOTH ARE PROPERTIES OF THE SUBSET RATHER THAN OF ANY METHOD, AND
THE CEILING IS REPORTED SO THAT AN EASIER SEARCH IS NOT
CONFUSED WITH A CLEANER CATALOGUE. THE PAIRED ADVANTAGE IS POSITIVE IN EVERY ONE OF THE 15 CELLS, RANGING FROM +8.5 TO
+32.2 PERCENTAGE POINTS, WITH EXACT MCNEMAR p < 10-8 THROUGHOUT. THE FULL 79,803-ITEM CATALOGUE IS MEASURED
SEPARATELY AT n = 900 (TABLES IX AND X).

N
1,000 2,500 5,000 10,000 20,000 40,000

floor
9.97 11.29 12.28 13.28 14.27 15.26

ceil.
100.0 99.7 99.5 99.1 98.1 96.5

T = 20
IG RAIG
28.5 60.7 17.5 44.2 10.0 35.5 8.3 27.2 4.8 16.0 2.8 11.3

T = 40

IG RAIG

62.0

84.2

52.3

72.3

45.0

64.8

34.7

54.7

28.3

44.3

--

--

T = 60

IG RAIG

72.5

88.3

64.5

78.5

57.3

73.2

48.3

63.0

--

--

--

--

TABLE XIII TOP-1 ACCURACY (%) AGAINST QUERY BUDGET, HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 900; THE DATA BEHIND FIG. 3. THE LAST TWO COLUMNS
EXTEND THE CURVE TO T = 60 FROM AN INDEPENDENT RUN AT n = 450, AND ARE MARKED SEPARATELY BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT FROM
THE SAME SAMPLE.

n = 900

Method

10 20

30

40

Random+soft

0.11 0.11 0.11 0.22

IG+hard

0.11 2.11 2.11 2.11

IG+soft-uniform

0.00 3.22 10.44 16.56

IG+soft-objective

0.11 0.33 0.33 0.33

Learned-noiseblind 0.22 3.33 11.78 18.89

Learned-noiseaware 0.00 2.44 7.22 13.89

RAIG-empirical

0.11 1.78 5.33 10.22

RAIG-tiered

0.22 7.44 18.33 26.56

n = 450
50 60
---- 2.0 2.0 20.4 23.8 ---- ---- 20.9 24.2 15.1 16.0 33.6 35.1

answer removes the true item permanently. The belief-quality metrics say the same thing more starkly--at T = 40 IG+hard records a negative log posterior of 97.45 bits on the true item, having assigned the correct answer essentially zero probability, against 9.87 for IG+soft-uniform and 6.41 for RAIG-tiered.
Because top-1 accuracy is the most compressed metric at low budgets, we also report rank-based ones, where the ordering is unchanged and the margins are larger. At T = 40 RAIG-tiered attains a median rank of 8.8 for the true item against 59.0 for IG+soft-uniform, a mean reciprocal rank of 0.347 against 0.216, and top-10 accuracy of 51.9% against 31.4%. On a catalogue of 79,803 items, a median rank under ten after forty noisy questions is the substantive result.
F. Accuracy as a Function of Catalogue Size
Catalogue size is a parameter of the task, not of the method, and the primary comparison fixes it at the largest value we have. Eighty thousand tracks at a budget near the capacity bound is the hardest configuration this task admits, and it is the reason the headline accuracies are what they are. Many deployed interactive identifiers are not in that regime: a product finder's catalogue, a fault taxonomy or a game's character set is more often thousands of items than tens of

thousands. This subsection reports what the same methods, with the same annotation, do across that range.
What this experiment is not. It is not cross-validation and must not be read as such. Nothing here is fitted, so there is no train/test split to make: the catalogue is the hypothesis space, and drawing a subset of it does not estimate generalisation, it shrinks the search problem. The entropy floor falls as log2 N , so accuracy rises for a purely mechanical reason, and a subset accuracy is not an estimate of the full-catalogue accuracy. What the sweep does establish is how the difficulty scales, and--the point that matters--whether the advantage this paper reports survives at every scale.
Design. For each seed we draw an independent uniform subset without replacement and compile it from scratch, so split masses, degenerate questions and identifiability are all recomputed; the target is drawn from that subset. Averaging over seeds therefore averages over the draw as well as over targets. Because a smaller catalogue has fewer colliding attribute vectors, the attainable ceiling also rises, and Table XIV reports it per size so that an easier search is not confused with a higher ceiling.
Three things follow, and the third is the one that matters.
First, the absolute numbers are a property of the operating point rather than of the method. At 1,000 items with a 60question budget, reliability-aware selection identifies the target 88.3% of the time against classical information gain's 72.5%. The same code with the same annotation reaching single digits on eighty thousand items at twenty questions is not a different method having a bad day; it is the same method asked a question some six bits harder with half the budget.
Second, the ceiling rises as the catalogue shrinks--from 93.7% at full size to 100.0% at a thousand items--so part of the gain is that fewer items are indistinguishable to begin with. That part is small over this range: the ceiling moves by six percentage points while accuracy moves by more than fifty, so what is doing the work is the shorter search, not the cleaner catalogue.
Third, and this is what makes the sweep worth reporting

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

18

TABLE XV GRANULARITY AND COMPONENT ABLATION AT THE HEADLINE BUDGET T = 40, HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 900. "GAP RECOVERED" IS THE
FRACTION OF THE INTERVAL BETWEEN IG+SOFT-UNIFORM AND RAIG-ORACLE THAT THE VARIANT CLOSES. K = 2 MERGES OBJECTIVE AND SEMI-OBJECTIVE INTO ONE RELIABLE TIER AT  = 0.09. K = M COINCIDES WITH K = 3 by construction IN THIS CONDITION, SINCE THE TRUE CROSSOVER IS THE TIER VALUE; SECTION VIII-A IS WHERE THE
VALUE OF PER-ATTRIBUTE TRUTH IS ACTUALLY ESTIMATED.

Variant
K = 1 (uniform) K =2 K = 3 (tiered) K = M (oracle) Capacity term only

acc. (%)
16.56 23.78 26.56 26.56
0.11

95% CI
[14.11, 19.00] [21.11, 26.56] [23.78, 29.44] [23.78, 29.44]
[0.00, 0.33]

gap recovered
0% 72% 100% 100% -164%

rather than merely flattering, the advantage does not depend on the regime. RAIG-tiered leads IG+soft-uniform in every one of the 15 cells of Table XIV, by between 8.5 and 32.2 percentage points, with exact McNemar p < 10-8 throughout. Had the effect been an artefact of operating at the entropy floor--where a sceptical reader might reasonably suspect that any difference is amplified by everything being near zero--it would have shrunk towards nothing as the task became easy. It does not. It is largest in percentage points at the smaller catalogues and the tighter budgets, where accuracies sit comfortably away from both floor and ceiling and a selection rule has the most room to matter, and it remains double-digit even where both methods are performing well.
We continue to report the full catalogue as the primary comparison, because it is the honest statement of the task we set out to solve and because a conditional claim should be made at its least favourable point. A practitioner whose catalogue is smaller should read Table XIV rather than Table IX, and should read the row for their own N rather than the best one.
G. How Much Annotation Is Actually Needed?
The tiered specification asks a curator for one label per attribute. It is worth knowing how much of the benefit survives asking for less, and whether both terms of (6) are doing work. Table XV varies the number of tiers K and, separately, strips the split term out of the criterion.
Two tiers recover most of the gain. A curator who can only distinguish "a person can answer this" from "a person is guessing" recovers 72% of what the three-tier annotation delivers. This is the cheapest useful version of the method and the one we would recommend a practitioner start from, since the objective/non-objective distinction is also the one the repeated-item measurement of Section IV-B corroborates most strongly (3.8× more stable, four of six objective attributes never disagreeing at all).
We are careful not to over-read the last two rows. K = M equals K = 3 here because the true crossover in the heterogeneous condition is the tier value, so this table cannot say what per-attribute truth would be worth. The experiment that can is the ensemble of Section VIII-A, where the truth varies within tiers and the three-tier specification recovers about 72% of the oracle's advantage.

Both terms are needed. Ranking by the capacity term 1 - Hb(^) alone--preferring reliable questions while ignoring how they divide the belief--scores 0.11%, worse than random selection and worse than the incumbent by a margin larger than the whole oracle gap. The mechanism is not subtle, and tracing ten sessions shows it directly: because the capacity term is constant within an attribute, the argmax walks a fixed traversal order that is identical in every trial regardless of the belief state, working through the one-versus-rest questions of the highest-capacity attribute (genre, at  = 0.03) in catalogue order. Each such question separates about 1.1% of the remaining mass, so twenty of them cannot narrow a catalogue of eighty thousand items. Reliability without informativeness is not a weak criterion; it is not a criterion at all, and the split term is what makes (6) a selection rule rather than a preference ordering over attributes.
The same tracing tool settles the clean-condition collapse of Section VII-B. Across ten traced clean sessions the belief mass on the true target is monotonically non-decreasing with no oscillation in all ten, which rules out the natural first hypothesis that RAIG's belief is being destabilised. The deficit is entirely a matter of which questions are asked, not of how the answers are absorbed.
H. Cost, and Behaviour Under a Stopping Rule
Two questions a practitioner asks before adopting this. What does the correction cost per turn, and under a confidence threshold rather than a fixed budget, does it commit sooner?
Cost. The answer is available analytically and a measurement can only confirm it. Both selectors perform the same (|Q|, N ) × (N, Rb) matrix product; RAIG then adds one elementwise affine map and one subtraction on a vector of length |Q|. The expected relative overhead is therefore 1/N = 1.3 × 10-5, which is four orders of magnitude below what a shared laptop can resolve.
It is worth reporting how the measurement behaved, because it is a small cautionary tale about benchmarking on contended hardware. Timing each method in a block of five repetitions produced, for the method that ran second, times rising monotonically across identical repetitions--14.9, 51.8, 90.2, 116.1, 145.8 ms per turn. A tenfold monotone increase across repeated runs of identical work is the machine degrading, not a property of the method, and blocking assigns all of that drift to whichever method happens to run last. We therefore interleaved the methods within each repetition and report the paired per-repetition ratio, which is invariant to any drift common to both. That ratio has median 0.987 over five repetitions, against an analytic prediction of 1.0000125: RAIG and classical information gain cost the same per turn, as the complexity analysis requires. The individual ratios range from 0.248 to 2.135, which is the honest measure of what this hardware can resolve, and is why we quote the analytic figure rather than a benchmark.
Stopping. Replacing the fixed budget with "stop when maxi bi  0.90" is what a deployed system would do. At  = 1.0 almost nothing reaches that threshold within twenty questions under either selector, which is itself the finding: the

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

19

threshold is reached in 0.67% of sessions under RAIG-tiered and 0.44% under classical selection. A budget at the entropy floor does not buy confident identification for anyone; it buys a shortlist. That is the regime in which the rank metrics of Section VII-E are the meaningful ones, and it is a further argument for reporting top-5 accuracy--19.0% against 5.9% here--rather than presenting top-1 alone as though the system were being asked for a commitment it cannot yet make.
VIII. ROBUSTNESS AND SCOPE
Section VII establishes an advantage under one annotation, in one catalogue, at one operating point. This section attacks each of those in turn, in that order.
The first three subsections concern the annotation, which is the assumption the paper most depends on and the one a reader is most entitled to distrust: we report the result across a distribution over the assumed values, then remove the assumed values entirely by learning them from logs, then show which routes to the same parameter do not work and why. The next two concern the operating point--how noisy users must be, and how wrong the annotation may be--and the two after that concern the catalogue, establishing the scope condition under which any of this transfers. The last two return to the observation model itself and relax its two structural assumptions.

A. Robustness to the Assumed Crossover Values

The three numbers (0.03, 0.15, 0.30) are assumed, not mea-

sured. The strongest objection to this work is therefore that its

headline result could be an artefact of having picked them. We

answer it by refusing to pick.

The design is stated in Section IV-D and matters more

than the outcome. The deployed system is held fixed: RAIG-

tiered always assumes the point values, because that is what

a practitioner who followed this paper would actually ship.

What varies is the truth. For each of 60 draws we sample

a per-attribute true crossover from the tier priors--scaled

Beta

distributions

on

[0,

1 2

)

with

the

point

values

as

means

and deliberately low concentration--and run the fixed system

against that world. Because the draw is per attribute, every

world contains within-tier heterogeneity that the three-tier

specification structurally cannot represent, and because the

semi-objective and subjective priors overlap ([0.037, 0.300]

against [0.142, 0.437]), many worlds locally violate the tier

ordering the system assumes. The question is not whether

the method works when it knows the answer. It is whether

a system built on three guessed numbers still beats current

practice when the world does not match those numbers.

It does, in every draw. Across 60 worlds the mean paired

advantage of RAIG-tiered over IG+soft-uniform is +6.21 pp,

with median +5.33 pp and a 95% range across worlds of

[+1.33, +13.02] pp. The advantage is positive in 100% of

draws; its minimum over all 60 is +1.33 pp. Each draw is only

n = 150 trials, so individual draws are underpowered, yet 53%

of them reach exact-McNemar significance at  = 0.05 on

their own, and no draw produces a significant win for classical

information gain.

TABLE XVI A CROSSOVER VECTOR LEARNED FROM 600 LOGGED SESSIONS, WITH
NOTHING ASSUMED. "EXPLORE" IS THE FRACTION OF LOGGED QUESTIONS ASKED UNIFORMLY AT RANDOM RATHER THAN GREEDILY.  AND MAE COMPARE THE LEARNED VECTOR WITH THE TRUE ONE ACROSS THE 20 NON-DEGENERATE ATTRIBUTES, AND ARE DIAGNOSTICS ONLY: THE ESTIMATOR NEVER SEES EITHER. ACCURACIES ARE THE PRIMARY
PROTOCOL, HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 900.

explore min obs

 MAE IG RAIG-EM RAIG-tiered

0.00

6 +0.829 0.054 3.22

8.33

8.33

0.10

26 +0.709 0.066 3.22

8.22

8.33

0.25

34 +0.806 0.057 3.22

7.78

8.33

Two further readings are worth recording. First, the advantage does not depend on the drawn world being an easy one: the correlation between the paired advantage and the mean true crossover of the drawn world is -0.18, so if anything the method does slightly better in the less noisy worlds, and it never depends on a favourable draw. Second, the gap to the oracle is real and quantified: mean accuracy across the ensemble is 2.58% for IG+soft-uniform, 8.79% for RAIGtiered and 11.84% for RAIG-oracle. Three coarse tiers recover about 72% of what perfect per-attribute knowledge would buy--which is the answer to "how much would measuring  properly be worth", and it is a meaningful amount but not a transformative one.
This experiment does not remove the need for the user study of Appendix A. It changes what that study is for: not to establish whether the correction works, but to reduce the residual 28%.
B. Removing the Assumption: a Crossover Vector Learned from Logs
Section VIII-A shows the conclusion survives the tier values being wrong. This subsection removes them.
We deploy the incumbent--classical information gain at a single global crossover, the system a practitioner already has-- for 600 sessions of T = 20 under the heterogeneous  = 1.0 channel, log the questions asked and the answers received, and run the EM of Section IV-C for eight iterations from a neutral start of ^ = 0.10 for every attribute. The estimator is given no annotation, no tier structure, no labels, and no knowledge of any session's target. It is then evaluated exactly like every other specification, under the primary protocol.
The learned vector is as good as the annotation. With no exploration at all, RAIG-EM reaches 8.33% against the incumbent's 3.22% (+5.11 pp, exact McNemar p = 2.3×10-7), and against RAIG-tiered it is a dead heat: 38 discordant pairs in each direction, p = 1.00. Three curator-assigned constants and a vector inferred from six hundred sessions of ordinary use produce the same accuracy. The three numbers this paper assumed can therefore be replaced, in a deployed system, by numbers the system measures for itself.
The estimate is attenuated, and it does not matter. The learned vector recovers the ordering well ( = +0.829, MAE 0.054) but compresses the range, and it does so systematically: subjective attributes whose true crossover is 0.300 are estimated between 0.158 and 0.230, while objective attributes

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

20

at 0.030 are estimated between 0.005 and 0.085. The compression is expected. The posterior used in (12) is itself diffuse-- the incumbent identifies the target only 3.22% of the time--so the expected disagreement at each turn is pulled towards the split mass, which regresses every estimate towards the middle. That this costs nothing is Proposition 5 at work: selection depends on the ordering of ^ across attributes, and a monotone attenuation preserves it. An estimator that is reliably ordered and badly calibrated is exactly what this acquisition function needs.
Exploration is unnecessary here, which we did not expect. A greedy incumbent asks its least-favoured attribute only six times in six hundred sessions, and we anticipated that the estimates for those attributes would be too noisy to use. Forcing coverage by asking a fraction of questions at random raises the minimum observation count from 6 to 34 and does not help: accuracy goes from 8.33% at no exploration to 8.22% at 10% and 7.78% at 25%, neither significantly different from the tiered specification (p = 1.00 and p = 0.68). The reason is visible once stated. An attribute the greedy selector never asks is an attribute whose ^ barely affects the ranking of the questions it does ask, so estimating it badly costs little; and the turns spent exploring are turns not spent identifying, which degrades the very posteriors the M-step depends on. A practitioner should collect logs from the system they already run, and not pay for randomisation.
What this does and does not remove. It removes the objection that the headline result depends on three invented numbers: it does not, and the same result is available to a practitioner with no curator and no annotation, at the cost of running the incumbent first. It does not remove the need for the user study of Appendix A, for a reason worth stating plainly. Our logs are generated by a simulator whose users err at rates drawn from the tier annotation, so what EM recovers is the structure we put in. The experiment establishes that the estimator is identifiable and sufficient--that this much can be recovered from logs of this size without labels, and that recovering it is enough to match the annotation--and not that real users' errors have this form. That remains the open question, and it is the same one throughout.
C. What Cannot Be Derived from the Catalogue Alone
The learned vector of the previous subsection needs a deployed system to generate logs. Before there is one, is there a specification that needs neither logs nor a curator? Section IV-E supplies the obvious candidate, and this subsection reports that it does not work and exactly why, because the failure delimits the contribution more sharply than the success does.
The candidate. Every attribute derived by cutting a continuous column has boundaries, and where those boundaries fall is a property of the data. We recover the cut points the original pipeline used--the shipped columns are threshold cuts, not quantile bins, and the recovered boundaries reproduce the shipped labels for 99.5% of items or better on all ten attributes--place a listener's perception at  z-scored standard deviations from the truth, and compute the probability that

TABLE XVII THE CATALOGUE-DERIVED SPECIFICATION, SWEPT OVER ITS TWO PARAMETERS: PERCEPTUAL NOISE  AND THE CONSTANT CAT GIVEN TO THE ELEVEN ATTRIBUTES WITH NO CONTINUOUS SOURCE. TOP-1 ACCURACY (%), PRIMARY CONDITION, n = 900. THE INCUMBENT SCORES 3.22 AND THE TIERED SPECIFICATION 8.33 IN EVERY ROW. NO SETTING OF THE TWO PARAMETERS RECOVERS THE ANNOTATION.

 cat RAIG-psycho vs IG vs tiered

0.10 0.01 0.10 0.03 0.10 0.10 0.25 0.01 0.25 0.03 0.25 0.10 0.50 0.01 0.50 0.03 0.50 0.10

3.33 +0.11 1.89 -1.33 4.33 +1.11 2.89 -0.33 2.44 -0.78 2.78 -0.44 1.89 -1.33 1.00 -2.22 0.78 -2.44

-5.00 -6.44 -4.00 -5.44 -5.89 -5.56 -6.44 -7.33 -7.56

the reported label changes. This yields ^f for the ten binned attributes with no annotation at all. The remaining eleven attributes have no continuous source, so they take a single constant cat. Two assumed scalars replace three assumed tier values, and the shape across the binned attributes comes entirely from the data.
It fails, at every setting we tried (Table XVII). The best cell reaches 4.33% ( = 0.10, cat = 0.10) against the tiered specification's 8.33% and the incumbent's 3.22%. All nine cells are significantly worse than the tiered annotation, by between 4.00 and 7.56 percentage points; not one is significantly better than classical information gain, and three are significantly worse than it.
The reason is structural, not a tuning failure. The eleven attributes without a continuous source are not a homogeneous group. Six are the objective metadata--genre, language, content rating, artist type, release type, track version--which a listener answers almost perfectly. The other five are mood, tempo, key, mode and time signature, which a non-musician answers close to chance. A specification that assigns one constant to all eleven must place these two groups at the same crossover, and no choice of that constant can be right for both: raising it to describe key and mode makes the system distrust language and genre, which are its most reliable questions. That is visible in the sweep, where increasing cat from 0.01 to 0.10 helps at  = 0.10 and hurts at  = 0.50, with no setting escaping the bind.
What separates those two groups is not a boundary effect that a psychophysical model could capture. It is knowledge: a listener does not fail to name the key of a song because the boundary between keys is fuzzy, but because they never learned to name keys. The taxonomy this paper's annotation encodes--objective, semi-objective, subjective--is doing work that no measurement on the catalogue can do, because the difficulty is a fact about people rather than about the data. Section VIII-B is the resolution: EM over interaction logs recovers exactly this distinction, because logs are observations of people.
We therefore report three routes to ^ and one dead end. A curator's three tiers work. A vector learned from logs works and needs no curator. Repeated-item discordance (Sec-

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

21

TABLE XVIII TOP-1 ACCURACY (%) AGAINST THE NOISE MULTIPLIER , WHICH
SCALES THE TIERED CROSSOVER VALUES WITHOUT CHANGING THEIR
STRUCTURE; ¯ IS THE RESULTING CATALOGUE-AVERAGE CROSSOVER.  IS RAIG-TIERED MINUS IG+SOFT-UNIFORM, n = 450 PAIRED TRIALS PER ROW, AND p IS THE EXACT MCNEMAR p-VALUE. THE ADVANTAGE CHANGES SIGN BETWEEN  = 0.5 AND  = 0.625.


0.000 0.250 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.000 1.250 1.500 2.000

¯
0.000 0.025 0.049 0.061 0.074 0.086 0.098 0.123 0.147 0.196

IG+soft-u.
96.0 50.9 24.0 14.2 7.1 4.2 2.4 0.9 0.2 0.0

Learned
91.1 43.1 19.1 12.0 7.1 4.7 1.8 0.2 0.2 0.0

RAIG-tier.
42.4 28.4 19.6 16.2 12.9 10.9
7.8 4.2 3.6 2.0

 (pp)
-53.6 -22.4
-4.4 +2.0 +5.8 +6.7 +5.3 +3.3 +3.3 +2.0

p
6·10-73 6·10-14
0.088 0.407 0.0026 0.0001 0.0002 0.0015 0.0003 0.0039

tion VII-B) and the psychophysical model here both fail, and they fail the same way: each measures a property of the catalogue, and answerability is a property of the people using it.
D. How Noisy Must Users Be Before the Correction Pays?
Table X reports three noise multipliers and shows RAIGtiered trailing at   0.5 and leading at   1.0. That leaves the crossing unlocated, and the crossing is the number a practitioner actually needs: it says how unreliable your users have to be before the correction is worth making. Table XVIII sweeps a finer grid.
Linear interpolation of the paired difference places the crossing at  = 0.586, which corresponds to a catalogue-average crossover of 0.0575--tier values of (0.018, 0.088, 0.176) rather than (0.03, 0.15, 0.30). The practitioner-facing statement is therefore: once users get roughly one answer in seventeen wrong on average, and that error is distributed across attributes the way the annotation says, correcting the acquisition function begins to pay. Below that, do not.
Two features of the sweep deserve comment. The advantage is not monotone in : it peaks at +6.7 pp around  = 0.875 and then declines, because at high noise every method is being pushed towards the floor and there is less accuracy left to win. And the deficit at  = 0 is enormous (-53.6 pp), which is the clean-condition collapse of Section VII-B seen as a limit rather than as an anomaly: reliability weighting is a correction for a channel, and applying it to a noiseless channel is not conservative, it is actively harmful. The learned policy tracks classical information gain across the entire sweep, never crossing above it except by noise, which is the same conclusion Section VII-D reaches at a single operating point.
E. How Wrong May the Annotation Be?
Section VIII-A varies the tier values while keeping each attribute in its correct tier. The complementary failure is a curator who puts attributes in the wrong tier, and it is the more likely one in practice: guessing that subjective attributes are around 0.3 is easier than deciding whether loudness is

TABLE XIX DEGRADING THE TIER ANNOTATION.  IS THE FRACTION OF THE 21 ATTRIBUTES REASSIGNED TO A DIFFERENT TIER; THE TRUTH IS HELD
FIXED AT HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0.  IS RAIG MINUS IG+SOFT-UNIFORM, AVERAGED OVER THREE INDEPENDENT CORRUPTIONS ( = 0 IS DETERMINISTIC, HENCE ONE), EACH AT n = 300 PAIRED TRIALS; THE RANGE IS OVER THOSE CORRUPTIONS. THE SPREAD IS WIDE BECAUSE n = 300 AT THESE ACCURACIES YIELDS ONLY A HANDFUL OF SUCCESSES--READ THE TREND, NOT THE INDIVIDUAL
ROWS.

 mis-tiered IG+soft-u. RAIG  (pp)

0.0

0

1.67 6.00 +4.33

0.1

2

1.67 5.44 +3.78

0.2

4

1.67 4.56 +2.89

0.3

6

1.67 4.00 +2.33

0.4

8

1.67 2.89 +1.22

0.5

10

1.67 4.22 +2.56

0.6

13

1.67 2.33 +0.67

0.8

17

1.67 1.22 -0.44

1.0

21

1.67 1.11 -0.56

semi-objective or subjective. We therefore mis-tier a fraction  of attributes, drawn at random and reassigned to a different tier, and sweep  from 0 to 1 with the truth held fixed, so the only thing degrading is the annotation (Table XIX).
This replaces a misspecification surface that could not have shown anything. Sweeping a homogeneous assumed crossover against a homogeneous true one, as one might naturally do, cannot affect selection at all: by Proposition 5 a constant ^ adds the same capacity term to every question and leaves the ranking exactly unchanged, so such a grid measures only the belief update. The axis that bears on selection is whether attributes are in the right tier.
The advantage decays roughly linearly and changes sign between  = 0.6 and  = 0.8; linear interpolation puts the break-even at  = 0.72. Taken at face value that says the curator may mis-tier about fifteen of the twenty-one attributes before the correction stops paying, which is a remarkable amount of slack. We would not defend the second digit. At n = 300 and accuracies in the low single digits each cell rests on a handful of correct identifications, the spread across independent corruptions at a fixed  is of the same order as the effect being measured--at  = 0.5 the three corruptions give +1.00, +4.33 and +2.33, which is why that row sits above its neighbours--and the honest reading is that the break-even lies somewhere between  = 0.6 and  = 0.8 rather than at any particular point in between.
The qualitative conclusion survives that caveat, and it is the one that matters for deployment: the annotation is not a precision instrument. Getting a majority of attributes into the right tier is sufficient, and the method degrades gracefully rather than falling off a cliff. Even at  = 1, where every attribute has been moved, RAIG loses by only 0.56 pp-- because reassignment is to one of the two other tiers rather than to an adversarial one, so some of the objective/subjective contrast survives by chance. The adversarial column of Table X, where the assignment is inverted rather than scrambled, is the genuinely damaging case, and it costs 13.45 pp.

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

22

TABLE XX CROSS-DOMAIN COMPARISON, TOP-1 ACCURACY (%) AT T = 20, n = 600 PAIRED TRIALS PER CELL. THE BIAS IS PRESENT ONLY IN MUSIC, YET RELIABILITY-AWARE SELECTION IS INERT ON MUSHROOM AND TRANSFORMATIVE ON DERMATOLOGY. THE LAST ROW GIVES THE EXACT MCNEMAR p-VALUE FOR RAIG-TIERED AGAINST IG+SOFT-UNIFORM IN
THAT COLUMN.

Method
Random+soft IG+hard IG+soft-uniform IG+soft-objective RAIG-tiered RAIG-oracle
McNemar p

Mushroom
=0.5 1.0 1.5
0.3 0.2 0.0 27.7 8.0 1.0 31.7 10.5 2.3
1.7 1.2 0.8 31.5 10.3 2.7 35.7 10.3 3.8
1.00 1.00 0.85

Dermatology

=0.5

1.0

1.5

26.2

9.7

3.0

47.0

20.0

7.8

84.5

34.7

6.0

18.5

17.3

15.8

92.7

73.0

48.3

94.5

73.0

46.3

6·10-7 3·10-52 5·10-71

F. Other Domains: the Bias Is Absent, the Benefit Is Not
The bias characterised in Section VII-A does not replicate in the two non-music catalogues, and we report that plainly because it is a confirmation of the mechanism rather than a failure of the result.
On mushroom, the Kruskal­Wallis test across tiers gives H = 1.75 (p = 0.416) and Kendall's b is +0.006 (p = 0.974): no relationship whatsoever, with tier means of 0.780, 0.976 and 0.803 bits. On dermatology the omnibus test is marginal (H = 6.21, p = 0.045) but the rank correlation is positive, b = +0.135 (p = 0.335), and the tier means are non-monotone--0.797, 0.969, 0.762 bits for objective, semiobjective and subjective--so the effect there is that the middle tier splits best, which is not the pattern the bias predicts and does not favour our method. Neither catalogue contains a continuous attribute to discretise, and the mechanism we blame is discretisation acting on perceptual quantities. Predicting the absence of an effect and then observing it is stronger evidence for the mechanism than a third positive replication would have been.
What happens next is the interesting part, and it was not predicted (Table XX).
On mushroom, reliability-aware selection changes nothing: 10.3% against 10.5% at  = 1.0, McNemar p = 1.00. On dermatology it more than doubles accuracy, 73.0% against 34.7%, and the effect grows as users get noisier. Two catalogues with no measurable bias, and diametrically opposite outcomes. The correlation between informativeness and reliability evidently is not what decides whether the correction pays, and the next subsection identifies what does.
G. When Reliability-Aware Selection Pays
Two properties of a catalogue matter, and they are separate. Correlation determines whether classical information gain is actively harmed. In music, the selector seeks out unreliable questions: it asks at mean true crossover 0.225 against a catalogue average of 0.098 (Table XII). In dermatology it does not: it asks at 0.236 against a catalogue average of 0.240, which is to say it is behaving no worse than chance with respect to reliability. In mushroom it is mildly better than chance, asking at 0.170 against an average of 0.197. This

TABLE XXI THE RELIABLE-SUBSET AUDIT. FOR EACH CATALOGUE WE REPORT THE TOP-1 ACCURACY CEILING ATTAINABLE USING ONLY THE ATTRIBUTES A
USER CAN ANSWER (OBJECTIVE AND SEMI-OBJECTIVE TIERS), COMPUTED BY COUNTING DISTINCT ATTRIBUTE VECTORS. THIS IS A
PROPERTY OF THE CATALOGUE, COMPUTABLE IN SECONDS AND REQUIRING NO USERS, AND IT PREDICTS THE CROSS-DOMAIN OUTCOME
THAT THE BIAS MEASUREMENT DOES NOT.

Catalogue
Music Mushroom Dermatology

all attributes

floor ceiling

16.23 12.99
8.52

93.7% 100.0% 100.0%

reliable only

floor ceiling

15.35 8.55 8.24

37.1% 0.3%
70.8%

is exactly the ordering the bias measurement predicts, and it confirms that the bias measurement is measuring what we say it does.
Heterogeneity, plus the availability of reliable information, determines whether reliability-aware selection can gain. Even when classical information gain is not being actively misled, a selector that knows which attributes are answerable can steer towards them--provided those attributes still carry enough information to finish the job. That proviso is measurable from the catalogue alone, before any user is involved and before any session is run, and it is what separates dermatology from mushroom (Table XXI).
In dermatology, the nine objective and semi-objective attributes alone place 70.8% of cases in a singleton equivalence class. Steering towards them costs almost nothing, and RAIGtiered duly reaches 73.0%--a figure that sits essentially at the reliable-subset ceiling, slightly above it because the method still spends 22% of its turns on subjective attributes rather than banning them. In mushroom, the fifteen reliable attributes place 0.3% of specimens in a singleton class: the information needed to identify a mushroom is in its odour and its colours, and a selector that avoids them cannot succeed. RAIG-tiered accordingly shifts its question mix only slightly (47% objective against IG's 35%) and gains nothing. Music sits between, at 37.1%.
This gives a deployment test that costs a database query. Compute the identifiability ceiling of the reliable attribute subset. If it is high, reliability-aware selection will help substantially; if it is near zero, the unreliable attributes are load-bearing and no selection rule can avoid them-- though the belief update should still model their noise. It also explains the restricted-attribute baseline's behaviour without appeal to tuning: on music the objective-only ceiling is 0.7%, and IG+soft-objective scores 0.33%.
The correlation as a continuous axis. Three catalogues give three points on the correlation axis, which is not enough to see its shape. A synthetic family makes the axis itself the independent variable: attributes are drawn with a controlled range of split balance and assigned crossover probabilities on a fixed grid from 0.02 to 0.35 at a target rank correlation with that balance. Everything else--catalogue size, attribute count, budget, the three-tier bucketing of the drawn crossovers--is held constant, so the only thing varying across the sweep is the alignment between informativeness and reliability. Fig. 4

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

23

top-1 accuracy (%)
music:  = -0.44

60

TABLE XXII

RAIG-oracle

THE ABSTENTION CHANNEL. MILD IS  = (0.02, 0.10, 0.20) BY TIER,

RAIG-tiered IG+soft-uniform

STRONG IS (0.05, 0.20, 0.40); THE ERROR CHANNEL IS HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0 THROUGHOUT, n = 450 PAIRED TRIALS. "ANSWERED" IS THE

40

FRACTION OF CONSUMED TURNS THAT RETURNED AN ANSWER RATHER

THAN AN ERASURE, AND IS A CONSEQUENCE OF WHICH QUESTIONS THE

SELECTOR CHOSE.

20

0

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

measured corr(max Hb, 1 - ) across attributes

Fig. 4. The advantage as a continuous function of the informativeness/ reliability correlation, on a synthetic catalogue family with everything else held fixed. Classical information gain degrades monotonically as the correlation turns adversarial, from 37.7% at  = +0.99 to 12.0% at  = -0.99. Reliability-aware selection is close to flat over the same range (47.3% to 37.3%). The correlation therefore measures how badly classical selection is harmed, not whether the correction is available; the dotted line marks the correlation measured on the music catalogue.

reports the result over nine settings, n = 600 paired trials each.
The sweep contains no break-even point. RAIG-tiered leads at every setting, from +9.67 pp at  = +0.99--where the informative attributes are also the reliable ones and there is, on the correlation account, nothing to correct--to +30.17 pp at  = -0.68. That is the same lesson the cross-domain results gave, now on a controlled axis: what the correlation governs is the denominator, how far classical information gain falls, not whether reliability-aware selection has anything to offer. And the reason the correction is always available here is the one the previous paragraph identifies--in this family twelve of the twenty attributes fall in the reliable tiers and place 76% to 94% of items in a singleton class, so steering towards them is affordable at every .
The practical reading combines the two experiments. A catalogue with an adversarial correlation and an answerable reliable subset is the best case, and it is where the music catalogue sits. A catalogue with an answerable reliable subset but no correlation still benefits, and that is dermatology. A catalogue whose reliable subset cannot identify anything does not benefit whatever its correlation, and that is mushroom.

H. Abstention
Section III-G derives the acquisition function for a user who may decline to answer, (10), and attaches a prediction to it: if abstention correlates with subjectivity in the same direction as error, the two penalties compound and the bias should be larger than the pure-BSC analysis suggests. Predictions of that kind belong in an experiment rather than in a future-work list, so we implement the channel and test it. Each attribute additionally returns an erasure with probability f , tied to its tier on the reasoning that a user who cannot judge an attribute reliably is also the one most likely to decline it; an erased turn is consumed but produces no belief update. Three selectors are compared: classical information gain, blind to both; RAIG,

Abstention none
mild
strong

Method
IG+soft-uniform RAIG-tiered RAIG+erasure
IG+soft-uniform RAIG-tiered RAIG+erasure
IG+soft-uniform RAIG-tiered RAIG+erasure

acc. (%)
2.44 7.78 7.78
1.56 5.33 4.00
1.11 4.00 3.56

answered
1.000 1.000 1.000
0.849 0.930 0.932
0.692 0.854 0.862

subj. %
53.4 2.8 2.8
54.3 1.8 1.2
55.6 1.4 0.5

which models error but not abstention; and RAIG+erasure, which models both.
Table XXII reports the outcome. There are two results, and the first is a refutation of our own prediction.
The absolute advantage shrinks rather than grows. RAIGtiered leads IG+soft-uniform by +5.33 pp with no abstention, +3.78 pp under mild abstention and +2.89 pp under strong abstention. Measured on the paper's headline scale, the penalties do not compound; they compress, because abstention pushes every method towards the floor and there is progressively less accuracy to win. The prediction of Section III-G is wrong as stated, and we let it stand in the theory section rather than quietly deleting it, because the version that survives is worth having: on a relative scale the compounding is real and monotone, with RAIG's accuracy 3.18× IG's without abstention, 3.43× under mild and 3.60× under strong. The right conclusion is that abstention makes classical selection relatively worse and absolutely no more distinguishable, which is a weaker claim than the one we made in advance.
Modelling abstention explicitly buys nothing here. RAIG+erasure is indistinguishable from RAIG-tiered with no abstention (identical, as it must be when   0) and slightly worse under both mild (-1.33 pp, p = 0.24) and strong (-0.44 pp, p = 0.80) abstention. Neither difference is significant, so the finding is an absence rather than a reversal, but the point estimate is in the wrong direction and the mechanism is instructive. Because f is tied to the tier in the same order as f , the error-based discount has already steered the selector away from the high-abstention questions: RAIG-tiered gets 93.0% of its turns answered under mild abstention against classical selection's 84.9%, without modelling abstention at all. The extra (1 - ) factor then applies a second discount to attributes that are already being avoided, driving the subjective share of questions to 0.5% at strong abstention and narrowing the question pool towards the reliable-subset ceiling of Section VIII-G--the same over-correction that produces the clean-condition collapse.
The practical implication is that a deployed system facing abstention should model it in the belief update, where an

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

24

TABLE XXIII INDEPENDENT AGAINST CORRELATED ANSWER ERRORS, HETEROGENEOUS  = 1.0, n = 900, PAIRED TRIAL FOR TRIAL ACROSS ALL FOUR CELLS. CORRELATING ERRORS ON SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES COSTS CLASSICAL SELECTION 0.78 PP AND COSTS RELIABILITY-AWARE
SELECTION EXACTLY NOTHING.

Method
IG+soft-uniform RAIG-tiered
 (RAIG - IG) McNemar p

independent
2.78 7.78
+5.00 pp 3.6 × 10-7

correlated
2.00 7.78
+5.78 pp 3.1 × 10-9

difference
-0.78 pp (p = 0.016) +0.00 pp (p = 1.00)

erasure must not be treated as evidence, and can safely leave the selector to the error term alone--provided abstention and error are ordered the same way across attributes. Where they are not, (10) is the correct criterion and this experiment says nothing against it.
I. Correlated Answer Errors
The channel of Section III draws every answer independently at rate . A real listener who misjudges "is it energetic?" is likely to misjudge it the same way when asked again, so independence is the modelling assumption most likely to be flattering to us, and it should be attacked directly rather than listed as a limitation.
We attack it with a deliberately harsh alternative. The first time a subjective attribute is answered wrongly in a session, that attribute is marked corrupted for the remainder of the session and every later question about it is forced wrong; objective and semi-objective attributes keep independent draws, since simple slips rather than conceptual confusion are the plausible failure there. This turns a rate- channel into a per-session absorbing one on exactly the attributes classical selection prefers. Both variants run inside the same loop and consume the same random stream in the same order, so the independent and correlated columns are paired trial for trial and any difference between them is the correlation and nothing else.
The result, in Table XXIII, strengthens rather than weakens the paper's conclusion.
Correlating the errors costs IG+soft-uniform 0.78 pp--seven trials that it won under independent errors and loses under correlated ones, and not a single trial in the other direction-- while RAIG-tiered's outcome is bitwise identical across the two variants: zero discordant pairs out of 900. The paired advantage therefore grows from +5.00 pp to +5.78 pp, and its p-value improves by two orders of magnitude.
The asymmetry is not luck, and it follows from Table XII. The absorbing mechanism can only fire on subjective attributes. Classical selection spends 53.9% of its budget there and is exposed to it on most turns; RAIG-tiered spends 2.9% and is almost never exposed, and in these 900 sessions it was never exposed twice to the same subjective attribute, which is what a repeat requires. A selector that avoids the attributes on which users are unreliable is, as a side effect, also robust to their errors being persistent rather than fresh--which is a

property worth having, since persistence is the more realistic model and the harder one to estimate.
We do not claim this exhausts the question. Errors could correlate across attributes rather than within one--a listener with an unusual notion of "energetic" probably also has an unusual notion of "danceable"--and that structure would penalise any method that clusters its questions within a tier, including ours. Testing it would require a user-level latent-trait model that we do not have data to fit.
IX. DISCUSSION
A. What This Paper Establishes
Four things, the first three in decreasing order of confidence and the fourth the one that answers the objection this work is most exposed to.
That classical information gain systematically solicits the questions users answer worst, in catalogues of a particular shape, is established by direct measurement of selector behaviour and does not depend on any assumed . On the music catalogue, a classical selector asks questions whose annotated crossover averages 0.225 against a catalogue average of 0.098, filling 53.9% of a twenty-question budget with the tier a listener judges least reliably, while a uniformly random selector faces 0.097, which is the catalogue average. Whatever one believes about the numeric values of , the ordering of the annotation is what drives that contrast, and the contrast is large.
That the effect is manufactured by discretisation rather than inherited from the domain is established by three independent lines that agree: Proposition 4, which shows quantile binning fixes apparent informativeness at Hb(1/k) irrespective of semantics; the measurement that binned attributes carry mean maximum information gain 0.861 against 0.618 for natively categorical ones; and the observation that refining the binning to four equal-population bins strengthens the measured bias, from  = -0.44 to  = -0.61. The absence of the effect in two catalogues with no continuous attributes to bin is the prediction this account makes, and it holds.
That correcting the acquisition function helps, and does so from an annotation cheap enough to be deployable, is established at n = 900 paired trials with exact tests and multiplicity control, and--more importantly--is shown to survive the assumption it rests on: over 60 worlds drawn from priors on the tier values, the fixed deployed system wins in 60 of 60, with a minimum advantage of +1.33 pp. Three coarse tiers recover roughly 72% of what perfect per-attribute knowledge would deliver, and a two-tier annotation recovers 78% of the three-tier gain (Section VII-G).
That the three assumed constants are not load-bearing is answered three ways, in increasing strength: the conclusion survives a distribution over those constants; it survives a majority of attributes being placed in the wrong tier; and the constants are not required at all. EM over 600 logged sessions of the already-deployed incumbent--no annotation, no labels, and the target item latent throughout--recovers a per-attribute crossover vector that matches the curator's annotation to a dead heat, 38 discordant pairs in each direction out of 900 (Section VIII-B).

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

25

Two of the model's structural assumptions were attacked directly, and the outcomes point in opposite directions. Relaxing independence across turns strengthens the result: making subjective errors persist for the rest of a session costs classical selection 0.78 pp and costs reliability-aware selection exactly nothing, because a selector that avoids unreliable attributes is not exposed to their errors being persistent (Section VIII-I). Adding abstention, by contrast, refutes a prediction we made in advance: we expected the penalties to compound and the absolute advantage to grow, and it shrinks (Section VIII-H). Only the relative advantage compounds. We report the failed prediction because a paper that only tests the predictions it expects to confirm is not testing anything.
B. What It Does Not Establish
We claim no algorithmic novelty. The acquisition function is the mutual information between the target and the observed answer under a binary symmetric channel; it is in Cover and Thomas [3, Ch. 7], and a reader who finds (6) unsurprising is reading it correctly. The contribution is that the observation model in some deployed attribute catalogues is heterogeneous in a specific and adversarial way, that the heterogeneity is partly an artefact of preprocessing, that a learned policy trained without a noise model inherits the blind spot, and that the correction needs far less knowledge about users than one would expect. Those are empirical claims, and they are what the experiments are for.
Nor have we measured  on people, and it is worth being precise about what the log-based estimator of Section VIII-B does and does not settle. It establishes identifiability and sufficiency: a per-attribute crossover vector can be recovered from six hundred sessions of ordinary use without annotation, labels or ground truth, and recovering it is enough to match a hand-annotated one exactly. It does not establish that real users behave this way, because the logs it consumes were generated by a simulator whose users err at rates drawn from the annotation--so what EM recovers is, at bottom, the structure we put in. The same caveat applies to the ensemble over tier priors (Section VIII-A), the corruption sweep (Section VIII-E) and the repeated-item measurement (Section IV-B). Together they establish that the conclusion is not an artefact of three particular numbers. None of them tells a practitioner what  is in their domain, and only the study of Appendix A would.
Finally, the two negative results on catalogue-derived specifications should not be softened, because together they say something the positive results do not. RAIG-empirical, which infers reliability from the rate at which repeated items disagree with each other, is beaten by the three-tier annotation by 6.33 pp and is no better than classical information gain. RAIGpsycho, which computes the crossover of each binned attribute from the position of its own cut points, fails at every setting of its two parameters (Section VIII-C). Both measure a property of the catalogue, and both are defeated by the same thing: a listener cannot name the key of a song, not because the boundary between keys is fuzzy or because the catalogue disagrees with itself about it, but because they never learned to name keys. Answerability is a fact about people. What

succeeds--the curator's tiers, and the vector learned from logs--succeeds because each is, in the end, an observation of people rather than of data.
C. A Deployment Test
The cross-domain results yield a procedure a practitioner can run before committing to anything, and it is the most transferable output of this work.
1) Is there anything to correct? Compute per-attribute maximum one-versus-rest entropy and compare it across a coarse answerability annotation. A Kruskal­Wallis test on three tiers is the right instrument; a Spearman correlation on three tied levels is not. If informativeness concentrates on the hard-to-answer tier, classical selection is being actively misled.
2) Is the correction affordable in information? Compute the identifiability ceiling of the reliable attribute subset by counting distinct attribute vectors. This costs one database query. If the ceiling is high (dermatology, 70.8%), reliability-aware selection will help substantially even when step 1 finds no bias. If it is near zero (mushroom, 0.3%), the unreliable attributes are loadbearing and no selection rule can route around them.
3) Is the channel actually noisy? Reliability weighting is a correction for a noisy channel and is harmful when the channel is clean: in our clean condition RAIG-tiered loses to classical selection by more than fifty points at T = 20, because it breaks ties towards attributes that cannot by themselves separate the catalogue. Switch it off, not down, when answers are reliable.
4) Annotate coarsely and ship, then let the system reestimate. Two tiers recover 78% of what three tiers deliver, and three tiers recover about 72% of what perattribute truth would deliver. Once the system is running, that residual is addressable without a measurement campaign: EM over its own logs recovers a per-attribute vector that matches the annotation (Section VIII-B). The order of operations is therefore curator first, logs second, user study only if the first two disagree.
Steps 1 and 2 are computable from the catalogue alone. Step 3 requires knowing roughly how noisy users are, which is the one thing that genuinely needs observation--and Section VIII-D locates the threshold.
D. Threats to Validity
Simulated users. Every session in this paper is played by a simulator drawing from a binary symmetric channel. This is the central threat and we do not minimise it. Its severity is bounded in three ways: the deployed system never sees the true ; the conclusion is reported across a distribution of true  rather than at a point; and two structural assumptions of the channel--that every turn is an independent draw, and that a question is always answered--are attacked directly in Sections VIII-I and VIII-H. Three things remain unaddressed. Whether real answer errors are well described by any perattribute rate is the deepest of them, and only the study of

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

26

Appendix A can settle it. The channel is assumed symmetric, whereas real users may well have a bias--readier to say "yes" than "no" when unsure--which an asymmetric binary channel would capture and which our formulation does not. And errors are correlated within an attribute in Section VIII-I but never across attributes, though a listener with an unusual notion of "energetic" plausibly has an unusual notion of "danceable" too; that structure would penalise any method that concentrates its questions within a tier, ours included.
One primary catalogue. The headline comparison is on music. We add two further catalogues and a synthetic family precisely because one catalogue cannot support a general claim, and the resulting scope condition is stated as a condition rather than as a universal.
Greedy selection. We select greedily throughout. Greedy optimality under noise is established for a single common crossover probability [7] and, as Remark 1 notes, does not obviously extend to heterogeneous per-attribute capacities. Holding the policy class fixed at the one deployed systems use is what isolates the acquisition function; it is not a claim that greedy is optimal here.
Static reliability. ^ is fixed for the session. A real system could estimate a user's per-attribute reliability online from answer consistency, which would make the specification problem largely disappear--and would introduce an exploration/exploitation trade-off this paper does not address.
Simulator­method coupling. The simulator and the method share the functional form of the noise model. This is standard in the noisy-search literature but it is a real limitation: the ensemble experiment breaks the parameter coupling but not the functional-form coupling, and the abstention experiment is the only place where the true channel has a component the baseline selector cannot represent.
E. Future Work
The obvious next step is the user study, and it is specified rather than gestured at. Beyond it, three directions follow from what the experiments showed rather than from what would be conventional to list.
Per-user reliability estimation is the most valuable, and is the natural extension of what Section VIII-B already does. That estimator pools every session into one crossover vector, which is the right object when the population is homogeneous and the wrong one when it is not: a musician and a casual listener do not share a crossover for "what key is it in". Estimating ^f per user, from within-session answer consistency and a population prior, is a hierarchical version of the same EM and would attack the variation this paper's model cannot express. It also introduces an exploration/exploitation tradeoff--questions asked to learn about the user rather than about the item--that Section VIII-B shows is not free.
Non-myopic selection under heterogeneous capacities is the most interesting theoretically. Corollary 1 makes the difficulty concrete: with per-attribute capacities, a horizon-optimal policy may wish to reserve a high-capacity attribute for a later turn when the belief can exploit it, and a greedy rule cannot express that preference.

Finally, the discretisation result suggests attacking the problem one stage earlier. If quantile binning is what manufactures the bias, then a reliability-aware discretiser--one that chooses bin boundaries to maximise mutual information through the channel rather than to equalise populations--would prevent it rather than compensate for it. Nothing in this paper requires the binning to be given.
X. CONCLUSION
Expected information gain is the default acquisition function for interactive identification, and it was derived for an oracle that answers exactly. When the oracle is a person, the criterion has a blind spot with a specific shape: it scores a question by how evenly it divides the belief, and vagueness is what makes a split even. In a catalogue that mixes quantile-binned perceptual descriptors with skewed categorical metadata, the criterion therefore seeks out the questions users answer worst--not as a failure of tuning but as a consequence of what it optimises, sharpened by a preprocessing step that fixes apparent informativeness at a value determined by the bin count rather than by the attribute.
The correction is a single line, and it is textbook: score the question by the mutual information between the target and the observed answer through a per-attribute binary symmetric channel. What we have tried to establish is not that this quantity is new but that it is needed, and that the knowledge it requires is cheap enough to be had. Two coarse tiers recover most of the benefit; the annotation may be wrong for a majority of attributes before it stops paying; across sixty worlds drawn from priors on the tier values a system shipping the fixed point estimates wins in sixty; and a two-line audit of the catalogue predicts in advance whether any of this will help. The three numbers need not even be assumed: EM over six hundred logged sessions of the already-deployed incumbent, with the target item latent and nothing annotated, recovers a crossover vector that matches the curator's exactly.
We have also been explicit about the boundaries. Reliability weighting is a correction for a noisy channel, and on a clean one it is not merely useless but harmful. It requires a reliability model, and inverting that model inverts the result. The two routes that would have supplied one from the catalogue alone--repeated-item instability, and a psychophysical model of the bin boundaries--both fail, and fail for the same reason: they measure the data, and answerability is a property of the people. The route that does work without a curator is to watch those people, which is what the log-based estimator does and why it succeeds where the catalogue-derived ones do not. And the parameter has still not been measured on real people, only on simulated ones. That is the piece of work this paper specifies and does not do, and it is the piece that would close the argument.
APPENDIX A A PROTOCOL FOR MEASURING f FROM USERS
The most exposed assumption of this paper is the tier annotation (0.03, 0.15, 0.30), and four experiments reduce the exposure without removing it. Section IV-B measures an

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

27

adjacent quantity from the catalogue; Section VIII-A shows the conclusion survives a distribution over the values; Section VIII-E shows how wrong the tier assignment can be before the correction stops paying; and Section VIII-B dispenses with the values entirely, recovering them from interaction logs.
None of that is the same as measuring f on people, and the last of the four is the one whose limits are easiest to overstate. Its logs come from a simulator whose users err at rates drawn from the annotation, so it establishes that the parameter is identifiable from logs of that size and that recovering it suffices, not that human error rates have this shape. Only observation of people can establish that. We did not run a human study, and rather than list that as a limitation we specify the study, so that the gap is a piece of work someone can do rather than a hole in the argument.
Design
The estimand is not "how often is a user wrong", which is unidentifiable without ground truth about what the user is thinking. It is the crossover probability of the channel between the item a user has in mind and the answer they give: f = Pr[ a~f = af (c) | c ], where af (c) is the catalogue's value and a~f the user's report. This is identifiable if the item is known to the experimenter and unknown to be under test by the participant.
Task. A participant is shown a track--title, artist, and a thirty-second audio excerpt--and asked the same one-versusrest binary questions the deployed system would ask, in randomised order. Because the catalogue value af (c) is known, each answer is directly scoreable, and ^f is the per-attribute error rate with a Wilson interval [33].
Recall versus perception. A user of the deployed system answers from memory, not from an excerpt. The excerpt condition therefore measures a lower bound on f . We would run both arms: a perception arm with the excerpt available, and a recall arm in which participants nominate tracks they claim to know well and answer without hearing them. The contrast between the arms is itself the interesting quantity for objective attributes, where the excerpt makes the answer nearly free but recall does not.
Sample size. To separate the annotated tiers we need to distinguish 0.03 from 0.15 and 0.15 from 0.30. At  = 0.15, a Wilson interval of half-width 0.05 requires roughly 200 answers per attribute. With 20 attributes and 30 questions per participant, that is 130­140 participants, or fewer if each answers about several tracks. A pilot at n = 25 would not resolve individual attributes but would resolve the tier contrast, which is what the method actually consumes: pooling within tiers gives roughly 1,300 answers per tier at n = 25, ample to reject tier equality.
Analysis. The per-attribute rate is a proportion with a Wilson interval; the tier contrast is a mixed-effects logistic regression with a random intercept per participant and per track, since answers from the same person and about the same track are not independent. The pre-registered test is the tier main effect. The secondary analysis regresses ^f on (i) the annotated tier, (ii) the measured catalogue discordance df of (11), and (iii)

the bin count of the attribute, which is the direct test of the psychophysical mechanism of Section IV-E.
What the Study Would and Would Not Settle
It would settle whether the three-tier ordering is real and roughly how far apart the tiers are, which is the only property of the annotation that the method uses: by Proposition 5 only the heterogeneity does any work, by Section VIII-B an estimate that is correctly ordered but badly calibrated performs as well as the truth, and by Section VIII-E the tier assignment may be wrong for most attributes before the correction stops paying. The study needs to establish an ordering, not three decimal places, and it is powered accordingly.
It would not settle the point values for a different catalogue, a different population, or a different interface, and it should not be read as doing so. The transportable claim in this paper is conditional and has two parts, which Section VIII-G separates. Where answerability is heterogeneous and negatively aligned with apparent informativeness, classical selection is actively misled and the correction pays most. Where it is heterogeneous but unaligned, classical selection is merely blind and the correction still pays, provided the answerable attributes carry enough information to finish the job. Where they do not, no selection rule can route around them. Three coarse tiers capture most of the available gain in the first two cases, and nothing helps in the third.
APPENDIX B REPRODUCTION
Every number in this paper is produced by a script in the released repository and stored as JSON, and the tables are checked against those files mechanically rather than transcribed by hand. The determinism requirements of Section V--single-threaded BLAS, externally supplied random streams--make the runs bitwise reproducible on a given machine and make each method's results invariant to which other methods are run alongside it.
Two caveats are worth recording. First, results generated before the single-thread pin was introduced do not reproduce bitwise; they agree within sampling error, and where such a run is quoted we say so. Second, the budget sweep, the ensemble and the cross-domain comparisons are independent runs at their own sample sizes, so their overlapping cells agree within sampling error rather than exactly. We report the overlaps rather than suppressing them.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Hu and J. S. Downie, "Exploring mood metadata: Relationships with genre, artist and usage metadata," in Proceedings of the 8th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), Vienna, Austria, 2007, pp. 67­72.
[2] Y. E. Kim, E. M. Schmidt, R. Migneco, B. G. Morton, P. Richardson, J. J. Scott, J. A. Speck, and D. Turnbull, "Music emotion recognition: A state of the art review," in Proceedings of the 11th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), Utrecht, Netherlands, 2010, pp. 255­266.
[3] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd ed. Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[4] A. Re´nyi, "On a problem of information theory," MTA Matematikai Kutato´ Inte´zet Ko¨zleme´nyei, vol. 6, pp. 505­516, 1961.

JOURNAL MANUSCRIPT

28

[5] S. M. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1976.
[6] A. Pelc, "Searching games with errors--fifty years of coping with liars," Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 270, no. 1-2, pp. 71­109, 2002.
[7] B. Jedynak, P. I. Frazier, and R. Sznitman, "Twenty questions with noise: Bayes optimal policies for entropy loss," Journal of Applied Probability, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 114­136, 2012.
[8] D. V. Lindley, "On a measure of the information provided by an experiment," Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 986­ 1005, 1956.
[9] K. Chaloner and I. Verdinelli, "Bayesian experimental design: A review," Statistical Science, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 273­304, 1995.
[10] D. Golovin, A. Krause, and D. Ray, "Near-optimal Bayesian active learning with noisy observations," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23 (NIPS), 2010.
[11] D. Golovin and A. Krause, "Adaptive submodularity: Theory and applications in active learning and stochastic optimization," Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 42, pp. 427­486, 2011.
[12] M. Horstein, "Sequential transmission using noiseless feedback," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 136­143, 1963.
[13] M. V. Burnashev, "Data transmission over a discrete channel with feedback: Random transmission time," Problems of Information Transmission, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 250­265, 1976.
[14] R. M. Karp and R. Kleinberg, "Noisy binary search and its applications," in Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2007, pp. 881­890.
[15] R. D. Nowak, "The geometry of generalized binary search," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 7893­7906, 2011.
[16] Y. Kaspi, O. Shayevitz, and T. Javidi, "Searching with measurement dependent noise," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 2690­2705, 2018.
[17] H. W. Chung, B. M. Sadler, L. Zheng, and A. O. Hero, "Unequal error protection querying policies for the noisy 20 questions problem," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 1105­1131, 2018.
[18] D. Geman and B. Jedynak, "An active testing model for tracking roads in satellite images," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1­14, 1996.
[19] B. Settles, "Active learning literature survey," University of Wisconsin­ Madison, Tech. Rep. Computer Sciences Technical Report 1648, 2009.
[20] P. Donmez and J. G. Carbonell, "Proactive learning: Cost-sensitive active learning with multiple imperfect oracles," in Proc. 17th ACM Conf. on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), 2008.
[21] B. Fre´nay and M. Verleysen, "Classification in the presence of label noise: A survey," IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 845­869, 2014.
[22] A. P. Dawid and A. M. Skene, "Maximum likelihood estimation of observer error-rates using the EM algorithm," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 20­ 28, 1979.
[23] V. S. Sheng, F. Provost, and P. G. Ipeirotis, "Get another label? improving data quality and data mining using multiple, noisy labelers," in Proc. 14th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2008.
[24] J. Whitehill, P. Ruvolo, T. Wu, J. Bergsma, and J. Movellan, "Whose vote should count more: Optimal integration of labels from labelers of unknown expertise," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22 (NIPS), 2009.
[25] C. Gao, W. Lei, X. He, M. de Rijke, and T.-S. Chua, "Advances and challenges in conversational recommender systems: A survey," AI Open, vol. 2, pp. 100­126, 2021.
[26] D. Jannach, A. Manzoor, W. Cai, and L. Chen, "A survey on conversational recommender systems," ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 54, no. 5, 2021.
[27] W. Lei, X. He, Y. Miao, Q. Wu, R. Hong, M.-Y. Kan, and T.-S. Chua, "Estimation-action-reflection: Towards deep interaction between conversational and recommender systems," in Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), 2020, pp. 304­312.
[28] W. Lei, G. Zhang, X. He, Y. Miao, X. Wang, L. Chen, and T.-S. Chua, "Interactive path reasoning on graph for conversational recommendation," in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2020, pp. 2073­2083.
[29] Y. Deng, Y. Li, F. Sun, B. Ding, and W. Lam, "Unified conversational recommendation policy learning via graph-based reinforcement learning," in Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference

on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021, pp. 1431­ 1441. [30] M. De Bruyn, E. Lotfi, J. Buhmann, and W. Daelemans, "20q: Overlapfree world knowledge benchmark for language models," in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Evaluation, and Metrics (GEM), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid), 2022, pp. 494­508. [31] D. Mazzaccara, A. Testoni, and R. Bernardi, "Learning to ask informative questions: Enhancing LLMs with preference optimization and expected information gain," in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, Miami, Florida, USA, 2024, pp. 5064­5074. [32] Z. Hu, C. Liu, X. Feng, Y. Zhao, S.-K. Ng, A. T. Luu, J. He, P. W. Koh, and B. Hooi, "Uncertainty of thoughts: Uncertainty-aware planning enhances information seeking in large language models," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (NeurIPS 2024), 2024, arXiv:2402.03271. [33] E. B. Wilson, "Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical inference," Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 22, no. 158, pp. 209­212, 1927. [34] Q. McNemar, "Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages," Psychometrika, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 153­157, 1947. [35] M. Kelly, R. Longjohn, and K. Nottingham, "The UCI machine learning repository," https://archive.ics.uci.edu, mushroom (Agaricus-Lepiota) and Dermatology data sets. [36] H. A. Gu¨venir, G. Demiro¨z, and N. Ilter, "Learning differential diagnosis of erythemato-squamous diseases using voting feature intervals," Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 147­165, 1998. [37] S. Holm, "A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure," Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 65­70, 1979.

